# Cupressus sempervirens

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Mediterranean cypress  
Mediterranean Cypress foliage and cones  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Cupressus  
Species:  C. sempervirens  
Binomial name  
Cupressus sempervirens  
L.  
Green: probable natural range in the Mediterranean Basin  
Orange: range including human introductions  
Red (small areas): Residual natural stands  
  
Cupressus sempervirens, the Mediterranean cypress (also known as Italian
cypress,[1] Tuscan cypress, Persian cypress, or pencil pine), is a species of
cypress native to the eastern Mediterranean region, in northeast Libya,
southern Albania, southern coastal Croatia (Dalmatia), southern Montenegro,
southern Greece, southern Turkey, Cyprus, northern Egypt, western Syria,
Lebanon, Malta, Italy, Israel, western Jordan, and also a disjunct population
in Iran.[citation needed]

Cupressus sempervirens is a medium-sized coniferous evergreen tree to 35 m
(115 ft) tall, with a conic crown with level branches and variably loosely
hanging branchlets.[2] It is very long-lived, with some trees reported to be
over 1,000 years old.

The foliage grows in dense sprays, dark green in colour. The leaves are scale-
like, 2-5 mm long, and produced on rounded (not flattened) shoots. The seed
cones are ovoid or oblong, 25-40 mm long, with 10-14 scales, green at first,
maturing brown about 20-24 months after pollination. The male cones are 3-5 mm
long, and release pollen in late winter. It is moderately susceptible to
cypress canker, caused by the fungus Seiridium cardinale, and can suffer
extensive dieback where this disease is common. The species name sempervirens
comes from the Latin for 'evergreen'.

## Contents

  * 1 Uses
  * 2 Iran's ancient cypresses
  * 3 Symbolism
  * 4 Other characteristics
  * 5 References
  * 6 Further reading
  * 7 External links

## Uses[edit]

Mediterranean cypress has been widely cultivated as an ornamental tree for
millennia away from its native range, mainly throughout the whole
Mediterranean region, and in other areas with similar hot, dry summers and
mild, rainy winters, including California, southwest South Africa and southern
Australia. It can also be grown successfully in areas with cooler, moister
summers, such as the British Isles, New Zealand and the Pacific Northwest
(coastal Oregon, Washington and British Columbia). It is also planted in
Florida and parts of the coastal southern United States as an ornamental tree.
In some areas, particularly the United States, it is known as "Italian" or
"Tuscan cypress".

4000-year-old Cypress of Abarqu, Iran

The vast majority of the trees in cultivation are selected cultivars with a
fastigiate crown, with erect branches forming a narrow to very narrow crown
often less than a tenth as wide as the tree is tall. The dark green
"exclamation mark" shape of these trees is a highly characteristic signature
of Mediterranean town and village landscapes. Formerly, the species was
sometimes separated into two varieties, the wild C. sempervirens var.
sempervirens (syn. var. horizontalis), and the fastigiate C. s. var.
pyramidalis (syn. var. fastigiata, var. stricta), but the latter is now only
distinguished as a Cultivar Group, with no botanical significance.

It is also known for its very durable, scented wood, used most famously for
the doors of St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican City, Rome. Cypress used to
be used in distilleries as staves to hold mash ferments to make alcohol before
the invention of stainless steel. Commonly seen throughout New Mexico, the
Mediterranean cypress is also known as the "drama tree" because of its
tendency to bend with even the slightest of breezes.

In cosmetics it is used as astringent, firming, anti-seborrheic, anti-
dandruff, anti-aging and as fragrance.[3] It is also the traditional wood used
for Italian harpsichords.[4]

## Iran's ancient cypresses[edit]

Cypress, Cupressus sempervirens, was the first choice for Iranian Gardens. In
all of the famous Persian Gardens, such as Fin Garden, Shazdeh Garden, Dowlat-
Abad, and others, this tree plays a central role in their design.[citation
needed] The oldest living Cypress is the Sarv-e-Abarkooh in Iran's Yazd
Province. Its age is estimated to be approximately 4,000 years.[5]

## Symbolism[edit]

Cypresses (1889) by Vincent van Gogh, Saint-Remy-de-Provence. Other van Gogh
cypress paintings include Wheat Field with Cypresses and The Starry Night.

Fastigiate Mediterranean cypress Cupressus sempervirens 'Stricta', planted in
Hawaii

In classical antiquity, the cypress was a symbol of mourning and in the modern
era it remains the principal cemetery tree in both the Muslim world and
Europe. In the classical tradition, the cypress was associated with death and
the underworld because it failed to regenerate when cut back too severely.
Athenian households in mourning were garlanded with boughs of cypress.[6]
Cypress was used to fumigate the air during cremations.[7] It was among the
plants that were suitable for making wreaths to adorn statues of Pluto, the
classical ruler of the underworld.[8]

The poet Ovid, who wrote during the reign of Augustus, records the best-known
myth that explains the association of the cypress with grief. The handsome boy
Cyparissus, a favorite of Apollo, accidentally killed a beloved tame stag. His
grief and remorse were so inconsolable that he asked to weep forever. He was
transformed into cupressus sempervirens, with the tree's sap as his tears.[9]
In another version of the story, it was the woodland god Silvanus who was the
divine companion of Cyparissus and who accidentally killed the stag. When the
boy was consumed by grief, Silvanus turned him into a tree, and thereafter
carried a branch of cypress as a symbol of mourning.[10]

In Greek mythology, besides Cyparissus, the cypress is also associated with
Artemis and Hecate, a goddess of magic, crossroads and the underworld. Ancient
Roman funerary rites used it extensively.

The most famous Muslim cemetery in Turkey where C. sempervirens is used widely
is Istanbul Karacaahmet Cemetery. In Istanbul Turkish the tree is referred to
as "Mezarlik Selvisi" (Cemetery Tree); its common name in Turkish and the name
used in Turkish forestry is "Kara Selvi" (Black Cypress). Cypresses are
mentioned extensively in the Shahnameh, the great Iranian epic poem by
Ferdowsi.

In popular culture the Italian cypress is often stereotypically associated
with vacation destinations to the Mediterranean region; Italy in particular.
The tree has been seen on travel posters for decades.[11][12]

## Other characteristics[edit]

In July 2012, a forest fire for five days devastated 20,000 hectares of forest
in the Valencian village of Andilla. However, amid the charred landscape, a
group of 946 cypress trees about 22 years old was virtually unharmed, and only
12 cypress were burned. Andilla cypresses were planted by the CypFire European
project studying various aspects of the cypresses, including fire
resistance.[13]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ "BSBI List 2007". Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-01-25. Retrieved 2014-10-17.
  2. ^ See also Uses section for the differing cultivated variants
  3. ^ Carrasco, F. (2009). "Ingredientes Cosmeticos". Diccionario de Ingredientes\ 4a Ed. www.imagenpersonal.net. p. 267\. ISBN 978-84-613-4979-1.
  4. ^ Hubbard, Frank (1965). Three Centuries of Harpsichord Making. Harvard University Press. p. 201\. ISBN 0-674-88845-6.
  5. ^ Craig Glenday, ed. (2011). Guinness World Records.
  6. ^ Servius, note to Vergil's Aeneid 3.680.
  7. ^ Isidore of Seville, Etymologiae 17.7.34.
  8. ^ Natalis Comes, Mythologiae 2.9.
  9. ^ Ovid, Metamorphoses 10.106ff.
  10. ^ Servius, note to Vergil's Georgics 1.20.
  11. ^ "Image: Italian_Lakes,_travel_poster_for_ENIT,_ca._1930.jpg, (3091 x 5015 px)". upload.wikimedia.org. 2009-04-15. Retrieved 2015-09-06.
  12. ^ "Image: 01422-2T.jpg, (300 x 453 px)". postercorner.com. Retrieved 2015-09-06.
  13. ^ "The curious case of Valencia's flameproof cypresses". sociedad.elpais.com. Retrieved 2015-09-06.

## Further reading[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cupressus sempervirens.  
  
  * Farjon, A. 2013 Cupressus sempervirens. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2014.2
  * Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4.
  * Zsolt Debreczy, Istvan Racz (2012). Kathy Musial, ed. Conifers Around the World (1st ed.). DendroPress. p. 1089\. ISBN 9632190610.
  * Panconesi, A. 2007 The cypress from myth to future. [Italian] 456 p. Ed. Centro Promozione Pubblicita, ISBN 9788888228204

## External links[edit]

  * Cupressus sempervirens \- information, genetic conservation units and related resources. European Forest Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN)

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q147513
  * Wikispecies: Cupressus sempervirens
  * APDB: 130995
  * ARKive: cupressus-sempervirens
  * Calflora: 9316
  * Conifers.org: Cupressus_sempervirens
  * EoL: 1034869
  * EPPO: CVBSE
  * FloraBase: 44794
  * FoC: 200005421
  * GBIF: 2684030
  * GRIN: 12665
  * iNaturalist: 64261
  * IPNI: 261974-1
  * IRMNG: 10591045
  * ITIS: 183456
  * IUCN: 32518
  * NBN: NBNSYS0000042098
  * NCBI: 13469
  * NZOR: f341dfc0-3824-4380-a7bf-1ec2980f3aab
  * PalDat: Cupressus_sempervirens
  * Plant List: kew-2748781
  * PLANTS: CUSE2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:261974-1
  * Tropicos: 9400073
  * WCSP: 383232
  * WOI: 317

  
  
Authority control

  * GND: 4191395-4
  * LCCN: sh85068784

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cupressus_sempervirens&oldid=843169116"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Cupressus
  * Flora of the Mediterranean
  * Trees of Western Asia
  * Trees of Europe
  * Flora of Turkey
  * Trees of Mediterranean climate
  * Plants described in 1753
  * Ornamental trees
  * Garden plants of Europe
  * Drought-tolerant trees
  * Least concern plants

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017
  * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Taxonbars with 25+ taxon IDs
  * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Asturianu
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????????
  * ?????????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * ???????
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * Norsk
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Shqip
  * Sicilianu
  * Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Turkce
  * ??????????
  * Veneto
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 27 May 2018, at 10:21 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

