# Dacrycarpus dacrydioides

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Kahikatea  
Mature kahikatea tree  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Podocarpaceae  
Genus: Dacrycarpus  
Species:  D. dacrydioides  
Binomial name  
Dacrycarpus dacrydioides  
(A.Rich.) de Laub.  
Natural range of D. dacrydioides  
Synonyms  
  
  * Podocarpus dacrydioides
  * Dacrycarpus excelsum
  * Podocarpus thujoides
  * Dacrycarpus thuioides
  * Dacrycarpus ferrugineum
  * Nageia dacrydioides
  * Nageia excelsa
  * Podocarpus excelsus

  
  
Dacrycarpus dacrydioides or kahikatea (from its name in the Maori language) is
a coniferous tree endemic to New Zealand.

The tree grows to a height of 55 metres (180 ft) with a trunk exceeding 1
metre (3 ft) in diameter, and is buttressed at the base. It is dominant in
lowland forest and wetlands throughout the North and South Islands. The leaves
are spirally arranged; on young plants, they are awl-shaped, 3 to 8 mm long,
and twisted at the base to lie spread to the sides of the shoot in a flat
plane; on mature trees, they are scale-like, 1 to 3 mm long, and placed all
round the shoot. The cones are highly modified, with the cone scales swelling
at maturity into an orange to red, fleshy, aril with a single apical seed 3 to
5 mm in diameter. The seeds are dispersed by birds, which eat the fleshy scale
and pass the seeds in their droppings.

Before extensive logging, trees of 80 m height were known.[2] A specimen in
Pirongia Forest Park in the Waikato region is the tallest native tree in New
Zealand at 66.5 metres (218 ft).[3] Tane Mahuta, the famously large kauri tree
(Agathis australis), is 51.2 m.

The tree was previously referred to by the misleading name "white pine",
despite its not being a pine; the Maori name kahikatea is now more widely used
(other Maori names are kaikatea, kahika, katea, koaka, koroi[4]).

Like many other species in the family Podocarpaceae, the classification of
kahikatea has changed over time, having also been placed in the genera
Podocarpus and Nageia. The Waikato still has small stands of natural
Kahikatea. The most readily accessible is at Claudelands Bush in the Hamilton
suburb of Claudelands which was previously a swamp.

Arohaki Lagoon with Dacrycarpus dacrydioides in the background.

Dacrycarpus dacrydioides cones and foliage.

## Uses[edit]

The timber was initially not so highly regarded by European settlers as it was
less attractive, strong, or resilient to rot than the other coniferous timbers
available such as totara. However, since the wood does not impart an odour,
and is clean and lightweight, Kahikatea was used to make boxes for the
exporting of butter when the refrigerated export became feasible from
Australia and New Zealand in the 1880s.[5] The butter was exported in 56 lb
slabs, and kahikatea became less common as the export industry grew. Indeed,
tall mature pure kaihikatea forest, a once distinctive and widespread wetland
type, is all but gone except for very small patches mostly on the West Coast.
The first bridge in Hamilton across the Waikato River was built mainly of
Kahikatea about 1880 but the bridge quickly became unsafe due to rot. The
piles (not of Kahikatea) are still visible in the vegetation alongside the
Traffic (Bridge St.) Bridge.

Kahikatea was used for boat building up until the 1970s because of its long
straight lengths. When 12% dry it is slightly lighter in weight than Kauri and
white in colour. Kahikatea was also used as late as the 1980s to carve out
waka, traditional vessels for Maori, in which they competed in various
watersports in Kaituna Wetlands.

For Maori, the kahikatea had many uses. The fleshy aril or koroi was an
important food resource, and was served at feasts in great amounts. The wood
was also favoured for making bird spears. Soot obtained from burning the
heartwood supplied a pigment for traditional tattooing (ta moko).

Kahikatea, along with other trees in privately owned forests, can only be
harvested under a permit system and if sustainable harvesting techniques are
used. There are still a few old-growth remnants of kahikatea left in the
Waikato (for example, at Mangapu and Mokau).

However, most kahikatea stands in the Waikato lowlands are relatively young
forest fragments, about 80-100 years old. These fragments have grown up around
a few old trees left standing after most of the original forest was cleared
for farming. Some stands still have their original seed trees around which the
new forest grew. These massive trees, with trunks occasionally over 2 m
across, are about 400-500 years old.

There are about 370 kahikatea fragments in the Waikato region. They are
typically small, between 0.5 and 50 ha, with half of them less than 5 ha. Most
of them grow on the river floodplains of the Waikato Basin, Hauraki Plains and
Mokau River.

Because humans now control flood events and re-sow flood-damaged pasture, it
is unlikely to see many new areas of kahikatea forest developing in the
Waikato. Scientists estimate that more than 98 of percent of the pre-European
kahikatea forest has been lost nationwide.

  

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Thomas, P. (2013). "Dacrycarpus dacrydioides". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42443A2980535. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42443A2980535.en. Retrieved 9 November 2017.
  2. ^ "Dacrycarpus dacrydioides (Kahikatea, White pine)". www.terrain.net.nz. T.E.R:R.A.I.N - Taranaki Educational Resource: Research, Analysis and Information Network. Retrieved 2017-01-17.
  3. ^ "Features of Pirongia Forest Park", Department of Conservation
  4. ^ "Maori Plant Uses Database". Archived from the original on 2013-12-04.
  5. ^ Gymnosperm Database - Dacrycarpus dacrydioides

## External links[edit]

  * Gymnosperm Database - Dacrycarpus dacrydioides
  * New Zealand plant conservation network - Dacrycarpus dacrydioides
  * Environment Waikato - Kahikatea
  * http://www.nzes.org.nz/nzje/free_issues/ProNZES21_62.pdf The Kahikatea Forests of South Westland (New Zealand Journal of Ecology)

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dacrycarpus dacrydioides.  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Dacrycarpus dacrydioides

  * Wikidata: Q1981615
  * Wikispecies: Dacrycarpus dacrydioides
  * Conifers.org: Dacrycarpus_dacrydioides
  * EoL: 1033665
  * EPPO: PODDA
  * GBIF: 2687859
  * GRIN: 101861
  * iNaturalist: 52390
  * IPNI: 687947-1
  * IRMNG: 11160146
  * ITIS: 505861
  * IUCN: 42443
  * NCBI: 56888
  * NZOR: 95ee1063-4e1e-4b6b-9e56-86bc30bb9385
  * PfaF: Dacrycarpus dacrydioides
  * Plant List: kew-2755036
  * PLANTS: DADA2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:687947-1
  * Tropicos: 25600137
  * uBio: 5863322
  * WCSP: 383482

  
  
Podocarpus dacrydioides

  * Wikidata: Q14947698
  * GBIF: 5286243
  * GRIN: 29108
  * IPNI: 263469-1
  * IRMNG: 10597640
  * ITIS: 519277
  * NZOR: 14896907-9bef-4fca-9d79-4df710babba2
  * Tropicos: 25600183

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dacrycarpus_dacrydioides&oldid=846640882"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Dacrycarpus
  * Trees of New Zealand
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Least concern plants

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Espanol
  * Francais
  * Italiano
  * Lietuviu
  * Maori
  * Nederlands
  * Norsk nynorsk
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 20 June 2018, at 01:14 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

