# Juniperus cedrus

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Juniperus cedrus  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Endangered (IUCN 3.1)  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Juniperus  
Species:  J. cedrus  
Binomial name  
Juniperus cedrus  
Webb & Berthel.  
  
Juniperus cedrus, the Canary Islands juniper, is a species of juniper, native
to the western Canary Islands (Tenerife, La Palma, Gran Canaria, Gomera) and
Madeira (J. cedrus Webb & Berthel. subsp. maderensis (Menezes) Rivas Mart et
al.), where it occurs at altitudes of 500-2400 m. It is closely related to
Juniperus oxycedrus (Prickly Juniper) of the Mediterranean region and
Juniperus brevifolia (Azores Juniper) of the Azores.

It is a large shrub or tree growing to a height of 5-20 m (rarely 25 m). The
leaves are evergreen, needle-like, in whorls of three, green to glaucous-
green, 8-23 mm long and 1-2 mm broad, with a double white stomatal band (split
by a green midrib) on the inner surface. It is usually dioecious, with
separate male and female plants. The seed cones are berry-like, green ripening
in 18 months to orange-red with a variable pink waxy coating; they are
spherical, 8-15 mm diameter, and have six fused scales in two whorls of three;
the three larger scales each with a single seed. The seeds are dispersed when
birds eat the cones, digesting the fleshy scales and passing the hard seeds in
their droppings. The male cones are yellow, 2-3 mm long, and fall soon after
shedding their pollen in February-March.

It is endangered in its native range due to a combination of historical
felling for the valuable wood, and overgrazing by goats. It has been fully
protected since 1953 and populations are very slowly recovering. Historical
reports suggest trees up to 30 m tall occurred in the past; trees over 10 m
are very rare now and confined to inaccessible cliffs.

It is occasionally grown as an ornamental tree in warm temperate climates,
including New Zealand, the British Isles and California, but is not common in
cultivation. There are also some small experimental plantations on the Canary
Islands, where it has shown fast growth in good conditions, reaching about
14-15 m tall in 40 years.

Extraction of the wood with acetone, followed by analysis of the extract,
indicate that the essential oil of Juniperus cedrus is particularly rich in
thujopsene, which comprises around 2.2% of the weight of the heartwood.[1]

## References[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juniperus cedrus.  
  
  * Trees portal

  1. ^ Runeberg, J. (1960). "The Chemistry of the Natural Order Cupressales XXX. Constituents of Juniperus cedrus L" (pdf). Acta Chemica Scandinavica. 14: 1991-1994. doi:10.3891/acta.chem.scand.14-1991.

## General references and external links[edit]

  * Gymnosperm Database: Juniperus cedrus
  * Photos of tree and cones
  * Farjon, A. (2005). A Monograph of Cupressaceae (p. 255).
  * Rumeu Ruiz, B, de Sequeira, M, Elliot, M & Gardner, M. 2011. Juniperus cedrus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2015.2. Downloaded on 1 September 2015.

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q1723636
  * Wikispecies: Juniperus cedrus
  * APDB: 131003
  * ARKive: juniperus-cedrus
  * Conifers.org: Juniperus_cedrus
  * EoL: 1034903
  * EPPO: IUPCE
  * GBIF: 2684616
  * GRIN: 20814
  * iNaturalist: 135934
  * IPNI: 262172-1
  * ITIS: 822537
  * IUCN: 30327
  * NCBI: 746016
  * NZOR: 07fad55b-c309-4069-9e92-7446dd1db6cd
  * Plant List: kew-2332652
  * PLANTS: JUCE3
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:262172-1
  * Tropicos: 9400720
  * WCSP: 377533

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juniperus_cedrus&oldid=851711274"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List endangered species
  * Juniperus
  * Flora of the Canary Islands
  * Flora of Madeira
  * Endemic flora of Macaronesia
  * Garden plants of Europe
  * Ornamental trees
  * Trees of Mediterranean climate

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Islenska
  * Norsk
  * ??????
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 24 July 2018, at 03:10 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

