# Juniperus phoenicea

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date
information. In particular: Juniperus turbinata has been split off. Relevant
discussion may be found on the talk page. Please update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. (January 2018)  
  
Juniperus phoenicea  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom:  Plantae  
Division:  Pinophyta  
Class:  Pinopsida  
Order:  Pinales  
Family:  Cupressaceae  
Genus:  Juniperus  
Species:  J. phoenicea  
Binomial name  
Juniperus phoenicea  
L.  
Natural range  
Synonyms[2]  
  
  * Cupressus devoniana Beissn.
  * Cupressus tetragona Humb. & Bonpl. ex Carriere
  * Juniperus bacciformis Carriere
  * Juniperus divaricata Carriere nom. inval.
  * Juniperus formosa Carriere nom. inval.
  * Juniperus langoldiana Gordon
  * Juniperus lycia L.
  * Juniperus malacocarpa Carriere
  * Juniperus myosuros Senecl.
  * Juniperus myurus Beissn.
  * Juniperus terminalis Salisb. nom. illeg.
  * Juniperus tetragona Moench nom. illeg.
  * Oxycedrus licia Garsault
  * Sabina bacciformis (Carriere) Antoine
  * Sabina lycia (L.) Antoine
  * Sabina phoenicea (L.) Antoine
  * Sabinella phoenicea (L.) Nakai

  
  
Juniperus Phoenicea \- MHNT

Juniperus phoenicea, the Phoenicean juniper or Arar,[3] is a juniper found
throughout the Mediterranean region, from Morocco and Portugal east to Italy,
Turkey and Egypt, south on the mountains of Lebanon, the Palestine region and
in western Saudi Arabia near the Red Sea, and also on Madeira and the Canary
Islands. It mostly grows at low altitudes close to the coast, but reaches
2,400 metres (7,900 ft) altitude in the south of its range in the Atlas
Mountains. It is the vegetable symbol of the island of El Hierro.[4]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
    * 1.1 Infraspecific taxa
  * 2 Ecology
  * 3 Uses
  * 4 Potential uses
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
    * 6.1 General references - links

## Description[edit]

Juniperus phoenicea is a large shrub or small tree reaching 5-8 metres (16-26
ft) tall, with a trunk up to 1-2 metres (3 ft 3 in-6 ft 7 in) in diameter and
a rounded or irregular crown. The bark, which can be pealed in strips, is dark
greyish-brown. The leaves are of two forms, juvenile needle-like leaves 5-14
mm long and 1 mm wide on seedlings, and adult scale-leaves 1-2 mm long on
older plants with a green to blue-green color; they are arranged in opposite
decussate pairs or whorls of three. It is largely monoecious, but some
individual plants are dioecious. The female cones are berry-like, 6-14 mm in
diameter, orange-brown, occasionally with a pinkish waxy bloom, and contain
3-8 seeds; they are mature in about 18 months, and are mainly dispersed by
birds. The male cones are 2-4 mm long, and shed their pollen in early spring,
which is wind-pollinated.

### Infraspecific taxa[edit]

There are two varieties, treated as subspecies by some authors and as separate
species by others:[5]

  * Juniperus phoenicea var. phoenicea = J. phoenicea. Throughout the range of the species. Cones globose, about as wide as long. Leaves are small and obtuse. Sheds pollen in the spring.
  * Juniperus phoenicea var. turbinata (syn. Juniperus turbinata). Confined to coastal sand dune habitats. Cones oval, narrower than long. Leaves are long and thin. Sheds pollen in the autumn.

## Ecology[edit]

This species prefers a hot, arid climate with a lot of light, and grows on
rocky or sandy ground. Its preferred soil is calcareous with a pH between
7.7-7.9 (moderately basic), but could also be silicate. Despite having a
shallow root system,[6] it can survive with as little as 200mm of rain per
year. It can often be found forming scrubs and thickets with other species.
[7] Each generation lasts about 25 years.[8]

Its habitat in coastal areas is most threatened by the presence of humans,
both settled and touring. Humans also plant not-naturally-present plants such
as pines, black locust, French tamarisk, desert false Indigo, American agave,
tree of heaven, and some succulent plants from South Africa. The purpose of
this is usually to stabilize the dunes, but these outside plants interfere
with the natural vegetation. It is also threatened easily by fires, because it
is quite flammable and does not regenerate well. This makes it necessary to
plant new organisms after a fire has damaged the others.[9]

## Uses[edit]

The tree's essential oil is especially rich in the tricyclic sesquiterpene
thujopsene; the heartwood contains an estimated 2.2% of this hydrocarbon. The
biochemist Jarl Runeburg noted in 1960 that "Juniperus phoenicea appears to be
the most convenient source of thujopsene so far encountered."[6] These
essential oils used to be used in cosmetics,[7] and have been shown to protect
the liver as well.[10]

Its wood is often used for small manufactured objects and inlay works. In
parts of Africa when the trunk is straight, the wood is used for parts of
buildings as well as carpentry. Mainly in Africa, however, it is used for fuel
and producing charcoal.[7]

Additionally, the cones can be used in cooking or in alcoholic beverages.[7]
Specifically, they are used to flavor gin.[11]

In Egypt around 1500BC was the first recorded use of using the Juniperus
phoenicea medicinally, which was to relieve joint and muscle pain.[12] In
Algerian folk medicine, the leaves are used in various ways to treat diabetes,
diarrhea, rheumatism, and bronco-pulmonary disease. They can also be used as a
diuretic. The leaves and berries combined can be used to combat diabetes as
well in both Algerian and Moroccan medicine.[13] In Jordanian traditional
medicine, bronchitis and arthritis are treated by a steam inhalant of this
plant. Additionally, the leaves and berries are used to treat diabetes
mellitus, edema, and urinary tract problems. Specifically, extracts from the
leaves are also used to treat gout. The leaves and berries are used in
Tunisian folk medicine to treat diarrhea, rheumatism, acute gonococcal
infection, eczema, dysmenorrhea, and sunstroke. In various medicine
traditions, the essential oils are used to aid digestion because they assist
the flow of digestive fluids, therefore improving digestion, as well as
eliminating gas and stomach cramping.[11]

In descending order of concentration, these essential elements are found in
this plant: Ca, K, Fe, Na, Zn, Cr, Co. Likewise, these are the toxic elements:
Br, As, Sb. In trace amounts, these other elements are also found in this
plant: Ba, Ce, La, Lu, Rb, Sc, Sm, and Yb.[13]

## Potential uses[edit]

Extracts of the fruit dissolved in different solvents show a significant
antioxidant effect. 70% inhibition was demonstrated, which is as strong as
some current synthetic antioxidants. Additionally, a solvent composed of 90%
acetone, 9.5% water, and 0.5% acetic acid with the fruit extract showed
significant antibacterial properties. It has been suggested that these
extracts could be used for preservation purposes with food or pharmaceutical
products.[14]

An aqueous extract of the berries has shown hepatoprotective effects in rats
that were given Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) to induce liver damage. The
presence of the aqueous extract of the Juniperus phoenicea berries prevented
significant hepatocyte damage, and even showed signs of assisting the
hepatocyte regeneration process. Additionally, it raised the levels of plasma,
total protein, and albumin, which also shows hepatoprotective properties. It
has also been show to reverse an imbalance of oxidant and pro-oxidant enzymes,
which causes the amount of antioxidant enzymes to return to normal levels. The
administration of CCl4 damages the structure of hepatic cells, and the aqueous
berry extract improves the structure, which further indicates
hepatoprotectivity.[15]

Juniperus phoenicea essential oils from the leaves have been shown to inhibit
the activity of enzymes related to Type-2 diabetes and obesity, namely
?-amylase and pancreatic lipase. This is likely caused by the terpenoids in
the essential oil.[16]

Both berry and leaf oil have shown strong anti-tumor properties. The berry oil
works best against brain tumors and lung carcinoma, secondarily against liver
carcinoma and breast carcinoma, and finally also against cervix carcinoma. The
leaf oil works about as well as the berry oil against brain tumor and cervix
carcinoma, and secondarily as well against lung carcinoma, liver tumor, and
breast carcinoma.[17]

## See also[edit]

  * Trees portal

  * List of animal and plant symbols of the Canary Islands

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Allen, D.J. (2017). "Juniperus phoenicea". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2017: e.T16348983A99965052. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2017-2.RLTS.T16348983A99965052.en. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
  2. ^ The Plant List: A Working List of All Plant Species, retrieved 11 February 2017
  3. ^ ambiguous arabic name also given to Tetraclinis articulata
  4. ^ Ley 7/1991, de 30 de abril, de simbolos de la naturaleza para las Islas Canarias
  5. ^ "Juniperus turbinata". World Checklist of Selected Plant Families. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 2018-01-28.
  6. ^ a b Runeberg, Jarl; Gramstad, Thor; Larsson, Lennart; Dodson, R. M. (1960). "The Chemistry of the Natural Order Cupressales. XXXI. Heartwood Constituents of Juniperus phoenicea L". Acta Chemica Scandinavica. 14: 1995-8. doi:10.3891/acta.chem.scand.14-1995.
  7. ^ a b c d Gonzalez, A. Gaston; Garcia-Vinas, J. I.; Saura, S.; Caudullo, G.; de Rigo, D. (2016). "Juniperus thurifera in Europe: distribution, habitat, usage and threats" (PDF). European Atlas of Forest Tree Species. European Commission.
  8. ^ [Farjon, A. 2013. Juniperus phoenicea. (errata version published in 2015) The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2013: e.T16348983A84426008. Downloaded on 20 April 2017. Farjon, A. 2013. Juniperus phoenicea. (errata version published in 2015) The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2013: e.T16348983A84426008. Downloaded on 20 April 2017.] Check `|url=` value (help). Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
  9. ^ Kabiel, Hanan F.; Hegazy, Ahmad K.; Lovett-Doust, Lesley; Al-Rowaily, Saud L.; Al Borki, Abd El-Nasser S. (2016). "Ecological assessment of populations of Juniperus phoenicea L. In the Al-Akhdar mountainous landscape of Libya". Arid Land Research and Management. 30 (3): 269-89. doi:10.1080/15324982.2015.1090499.
  10. ^ Knoll, Aaron (2015-09-17). Gin: The Art and Craft of the Artisan Revival. Jacqui Small LLP. ISBN 9781910254431.
  11. ^ a b "Research paper: Juniperus phoenicea L. from Jordan". ResearchGate. Retrieved 2017-04-20.
  12. ^ Stephenson, Tristan (2016-05-12). The Curious Bartender's Gin Palace. Ryland Peters & Small. ISBN 9781849759052.
  13. ^ a b Nedjimi, Bouzid; Beladel, Brahim; Guit, Brahim (2015). "Multi-element determination in medicinal Juniper tree (Juniperus phoenicea) by instrumental neutron activation analysis". Journal of Radiation Research and Applied Sciences. 8 (2): 243-6. doi:10.1016/j.jrras.2015.01.009.
  14. ^ Hayouni, E; Abedrabba, M; Bouix, M; Hamdi, M (2007). "The effects of solvents and extraction method on the phenolic contents and biological activities in vitro of Tunisian Quercus coccifera L. And Juniperus phoenicea L. Fruit extracts". Food Chemistry. 105 (3): 1126-34. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2007.02.010.
  15. ^ Laouar, Amel; Klibet, Fahima; Bourogaa, Ezzeddine; Benamara, Amel; Boumendjel, Amel; Chefrour, Azzedine; Messarah, Mahfoud (2017). "Potential antioxidant properties and hepatoprotective effects of Juniperus phoenicea berries against CCl 4 induced hepatic damage in rats". Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Medicine. doi:10.1016/j.apjtm.2017.03.005.
  16. ^ Keskes, Henda; Mnafgui, Kais; Hamden, Khaled; Damak, Mohamed; El Feki, Abdelfattah; Allouche, Noureddine (2014). "In vitro anti-diabetic, anti-obesity and antioxidant proprieties of Juniperus phoenicea L. Leaves from Tunisia". Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine. 4: S649-S655. doi:10.12980/APJTB.4.201414B114.
  17. ^ El-Sawi, SA; Motawae, HM; Ali, AM (2008). "Chemical Composition, Cytotoxic Activity and Antimicrobial Activity of Essential Oils of Leaves and Berries of Juniperus Phoenicea L. Grown in Egypt". African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines. 4 (4): 417-26. doi:10.4314/ajtcam.v4i4.31236. PMC 2816504 . PMID 20161910.

### General references - links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juniperus phoenicea.  
  
  * Conifer Specialist Group (1998). "Juniperus phoenicea". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2006. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 28 July 2006.
  * Adams, R. P. Junipers of the World: The genus Juniperus. Victoria: Trafford, 2004. ISBN 1-4120-4250-X
  * Gymnosperm Database: Juniperus phoenicea
  * Zsolt Debreczy; Istvan Racz (2012). Kathy Musial, ed. Conifers Around the World (1st ed.). DendroPress. p. 1089\. ISBN 9632190610.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q183497
  * Wikispecies: Juniperus phoenicea
  * APDB: 131014
  * EoL: 1061668
  * EPPO: IUPPH
  * GBIF: 2684640
  * GRIN: 20853
  * iNaturalist: 82695
  * IPNI: 262307-1
  * ITIS: 822606
  * IUCN: 16348983
  * NCBI: 61308
  * NZOR: ef784eed-f2ad-4194-846a-1bde36bcb5c7
  * Plant List: kew-2332707
  * PLANTS: JUPH2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:262307-1
  * WCSP: 377581

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juniperus_phoenicea&oldid=852842829"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Juniperus
  * Flora of the Mediterranean
  * Flora of North Africa
  * Flora of Southeastern Europe
  * Flora of Southwestern Europe
  * Flora of the Middle East
  * Flora of Western Asia
  * Flora of the Canary Islands
  * Plants described in 1753
  * Taxa named by Carl Linnaeus
  * Taxa named by Aime Bonpland
  * Taxa named by Alexander von Humboldt

Hidden categories:

  * Pages with citations lacking titles
  * Pages with citations having bare URLs
  * Pages with URL errors
  * Articles with obsolete information from January 2018
  * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Aragones
  * Asturianu
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Corsu
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * Francais
  * Hrvatski
  * Islenska
  * Italiano
  * Norsk
  * Occitan
  * ??????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Walon
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 31 July 2018, at 19:08 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

