# Widdringtonia whytei

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Widdringtonia whytei  
Widdringtonia whytei on Mount Mulanje, Malawi  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Critically Endangered (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Widdringtonia  
Species:  W. whytei  
Binomial name  
Widdringtonia whytei  
Rendle  
Synonyms[2]  
  
  * Callitris whytei (Rendle) Engl.

  
  
Widdringtonia whytei timber

Plate by Robert Morgan (1863-1900)

Widdringtonia whytei, the Mulanje cedar or Mulanje cypress,[3] is a species of
Widdringtonia native to Malawi, where it is endemic to the Mulanje Massif at
altitudes of 1,830-2,550 m. It has become endangered as a result of over-
harvesting for its wood, and an increase in the frequency of wildfires due to
human activity.[4][5][6]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Distribution
  * 3 Threat of extinction
    * 3.1 Requisites for regeneration
  * 4 Conservation
    * 4.1 Role of Forestry Department
    * 4.2 Other conservation efforts
  * 5 References

## Description[edit]

It is a large evergreen tree growing to 40-50 m tall. The leaves are scale-
like, 1.5-3.5 mm long and 1-1.5 mm broad on small shoots, up to 10 mm long on
strong-growing shoots, and arranged in opposite decussate pairs. The cones are
globose, 1.5-2.2 cm long, with four scales.[5]

## Distribution[edit]

The species Widdringtonia nodiflora is common in South Africa and Zimbabwe in
its dwarf form which has little more stature that a scrubby bush. It is only
on Mulanje and Mchese Mountain that a closely related tree form is found,
Widdringtonia whytei, commonly known as Mulanje cedarwood, but renamed
"Mulanje cypress" by the University of the Witwatersrand, to better reflect
its botanical relationships.

On these mountains the tree is limited to altitudes between 1830 and 2550 m,
and it is normally confined to hollows and valleys where the topography
provides some protection from fire. Most commonly it occurs as small woodlands
amongst rolling tussocky grassland slopes, between craggy, granite, rock
faces.

The timber is pale red, straight grained and pleasantly fragrant. Its major
qualities are that it works well and is extremely durable, being resistant to
attacks from termites, wood boring insects and fungi. For these reasons the
timber achieved major economic significance during the first three decades of
the 20th century, when it was high in demand for developing work. Currently
the timber is most used in the making of local arts and crafts, fishing boats
for Lake Malawi, as well as in the construction and decoration of many
prestigious buildings.

## Threat of extinction[edit]

Due to the high demand for its timber and changing ecological conditions, on
the mountain, the tree is under threat of extinction. Mulanje cedar is a
pioneer species, not a climax species, this means that it is good at taking
advantage of sites which suddenly become free of other competing species but
it is not successful in open competition. Thus, when fire occurs which
destroys the trees in an area of woodland, Mulanje cedar will normally be the
first tree species to re-establish itself. Other species will come in later
but because the cedar is relatively fast growing, it will not face much
competition for sunlight.

### Requisites for regeneration[edit]

If the area is undisturbed, the cedar will continue to grow well and other,
more shade-tolerant species, will come in and form a dense canopy beneath it.
The forest floor will then become dark, and young cedar, being relatively
light demanding, will not flourish. It is only if there is further disturbance
in the area which allows a lot of light to the forest floor that significant
quantities of cedar will be able to establish itself. Thus, fire is an
essential pre-requisite for dense, even, natural regeneration. The timing
between fires is also critical. If fires are too frequent, the young trees
will be killed before they can produce seed; if the fires are too infrequent
the trees will die before space is created for their seeds to use. Generally
it is said that a fire interval between 100 and 200 years would be ideal.
During recent years however, due to the increasing population of subsistence
farmers around the base of the mountain, fires spreading up and over the
mountain, especially in the dry season, have become more frequent. It is clear
that most young trees are being killed before they reach maturity.

## Conservation[edit]

### Role of Forestry Department[edit]

The Forestry Department provides the cedar forests with protection from
damaging fires. Each year at the beginning of the dry season hundreds of
kilometers of firebreaks are hoed clean of vegetation to provide barriers
which will impede the advance of fires. In addition early controlled burning
is carried out to reduce the buildup of combustible material which could
otherwise cause very intense and damaging fires later in the dry season. For
further safety fire standby gangs equipped with fire fighting equipment are
stationed on each of the plateau areas whenever there is a fire hazard.

As well as providing protection from fires the Forestry Department and the
Mulanje Mountain Conservation Trust carefully control the use of the trees.
Back in the day sawing licenses could be issued by the Forestry Department,
but because there was still an extensive amount of illegal pit sawing taking
place, the sawing season has been closed since 2007. But of course the pit
sawing did not stop. The black market for cedar wood grew, and has not been
stopped, yet. All cedar wood sawn after 2007 is illegal wood, and can be
confiscated by Forestry, MMCT and the Malawi Police. Since 2009 there are also
Armed Forestry Groups patrolling the Cedar clusters, to stop the illegal pit
sawyers.

### Other conservation efforts[edit]

But firebreaks and patrols are not the only things done to conserve Malawi's
National Tree. Forestry has established a planting programme to re-populate
the Mulanje cedar (cypress). In the rainy season 2008/09 there were over 50000
seedlings planted on Mount Mulanje with an estimated survival rate of over
30%. In 2009/10 Forestry plans to plant more than 20000 seedlings, with,
hopefully, an even higher survival rate.

But the problem is not solved, yet. Conservation needs to be continued with
rising intensity. The Widdringtonia whytei is still listed as "Threatened-
Endangered (IUCN 2.3)" in the annual Red List published by the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). If the conservation work is not
continued, the noble Mulanje cedar, Malawi's National Tree, will probably
become extinct in less than 10 years.

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Widdringtonia whytei". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T33216A2835167. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T33216A2835167.en. Retrieved 3 January 2018.
  2. ^ The Plant List: A Working List of All Plant Species, retrieved 6 January 2017
  3. ^ University of the Witwatersrand: Recommended English names for trees of Southern Africa
  4. ^ Conifer Specialist Group 1998. Widdringtonia whytei. Downloaded on 10 July 2007.
  5. ^ a b Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4
  6. ^ Pauw, C. A. & Linder, H. P. 1997. Widdringtonia systematics, ecology and conservation status. Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 123: 297-319.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q972303
  * Wikispecies: Widdringtonia whytei
  * APDB: 231523
  * ARKive: widdringtonia-whytei
  * EoL: 1034888
  * EPPO: WIDWH
  * GBIF: 2684261
  * GRIN: 42028
  * iNaturalist: 135523
  * IPNI: 264042-1
  * IUCN: 33216
  * NCBI: 1075059
  * NZOR: b5e43ec6-0bf2-4523-856f-cbec7901a0f1
  * Plant List: kew-2466624
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:264042-1
  * Tropicos: 9400129
  * uBio: 5859715
  * WCSP: 378745

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Widdringtonia_whytei&oldid=847134766"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List critically endangered species
  * Afromontane flora
  * Endangered plants
  * Flora of Malawi
  * Forestry in Africa
  * Forestry in Malawi
  * South Malawi montane forest-grassland mosaic
  * Widdringtonia

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonomy articles created by Polbot

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Francais
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 23 June 2018, at 05:30 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

