# Leyland cypress

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Cupressus leylandii)

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Leyland cypress  
Leyland cypress foliage and cone  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom:  Plantae  
Division:  Pinophyta  
Class:  Pinopsida  
Order:  Pinales  
Family:  Cupressaceae  
Genus:  Cupressus  
Species:  C. x leylandii  
Binomial name  
Cupressus x leylandii  
A. B. Jacks. & Dallim.  
Synonyms [1]  
  
  * xCuprocyparis leylandii (A. B. Jacks. & Dallim.) Farjon
  * xCupressocyparis leylandii (A. B. Jacks. & Dallim.) Dallim.
  * Callitropsis x leylandii (A. B. Jacks. & Dallim.) D.P. Little
  * xHesperotropsis leylandii (A. B. Jacks. & Dallim.) Garland & Gerry Moore

  
  
The Leyland cypress, Cupressus x leylandii, often referred to simply as
leylandii, is a fast-growing coniferous evergreen tree much used in
horticulture, primarily for hedges and screens. Even on sites of relatively
poor culture, plants have been known to grow to heights of 15 metres (49 ft)
in 16 years.[2] Their rapid, thick growth means they are sometimes used to
achieve privacy, but such use can result in disputes with neighbours whose own
property becomes overshadowed.[3] The tree is a hybrid, almost always sterile,
and propagated mainly from cuttings.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Taxonomic status of Nootka cypress
  * 3 Adaptation
  * 4 Commercialization
  * 5 Legal aspects
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

## History[edit]

Parent species of the Leyland cypress

Monterey cypress, Cupressus macrocarpa

Nootka cypress, Cupressus nootkatensis

In 1845, the Leighton Hall, Powys estate was purchased by the Liverpool banker
Christopher Leyland. In 1847, he gave it to his nephew John Naylor
(1813-1889).[4] Naylor commissioned Edward Kemp to lay out the gardens, which
included redwoods, monkey puzzle trees and two North American species of
conifers in close proximity to each other - Monterey cypress and Nootka
cypress. The two parent species would not likely cross in the wild as their
natural ranges are more than 400 miles (640 km) apart, but in 1888 the hybrid
cross occurred when the female flowers or cones of Nootka cypress were
fertilised by pollen from Monterey cypress.[5]

John Naylor's eldest son Christopher John (1849-1926) inherited Leighton Hall
from his father in 1889. Christopher was a sea captain by trade. In 1891 he
inherited the Leyland Entailed Estates established under the will of his
great-great-uncle, which passed to him following the death of his uncle Thomas
Leyland. On receiving the inheritance Christopher changed his surname to
Leyland, and moved to Haggerston Castle, Northumberland.[6] He further
developed the hybrid at his new home, and hence named the first clone variant
'Haggerston Grey'. His younger brother John (1856-1906) resultantly inherited
Leighton Hall, and when in 1911 the reverse hybrid of the cones of the
Monterey cypress were fertilised with pollen from the Nootka, that hybrid was
baptised 'Leighton Green.'[5]

The hybrid has since arisen on nearly 20 separate occasions, always by open
pollination, showing the two species are readily compatible and closely
related. As a hybrid, although fertility of certain Leyland cypress forms were
recently reported,[7][8] most Leyland cypress were thought to be sterile, and
nearly all the trees we now see have resulted from cuttings originating from
those few plants.[5] There are over forty forms of Leyland cypress,[9] and as
well as 'Haggerston Grey' and 'Leighton Green', other well-known forms include
'Stapehill', which was discovered in 1940 in a garden in Ferndown, Dorset by
M. Barthelemy[10] and 'Castlewellan', which originated from a single mutant
tree in the Castlewellan estate arboretum in Northern Ireland. This form,
widely propagated from the 1970s, was selected by the park director, John
Keown, and was named Cupressus macrocarpa 'Keownii', 1963.[11]

Other forms include 'Douglas Gold', 'Drabb', 'Emerald Isle', 'Ferndown',
'Golconda', 'Golden Sun', 'Gold Rider', 'Grecar', 'Green Spire', 'Grelive',
Haggerston 3, Haggerston 4, Haggerston 5, Haggerston 6, 'Harlequin',
'Herculea', 'Hyde Hall', 'Irish Mint', 'Jubilee', 'Medownia', 'Michellii',
'Moncal', 'Naylor's Blue', 'New Ornament', 'Olive's Green', 'Robinson's Gold',
'Rostrevor', 'Silver Dust', 'Variegata', 'Ventose' and 'Winter Sun'.[9]

## Taxonomic status of Nootka cypress[edit]

The taxonomic status of Nootka cypress has changed over time. In the past, it
was regarded as belonging in the genus Cupressus, and later placed in
Chamaecyparis. It has become clear, however, that when the genus Cupressus is
defined to include Chamaecyparis, it is paraphyletic unless it also includes
Juniperus.[1] In 2004, Little et al. transferred the Nootka cypress to
Callitropsis.[12] Little (2006) proposed another alternative by transferring
all the North American species of Cupressus, including the Monterey cypress
(C. macrocarpa), to Callitropsis.[13] In some of these classifications, the
hybrids become very unusual in being intergeneric hybrids, the only ones ever
reported among the gymnosperms. In 2010, Mao et al. performed a more detailed
molecular analysis and redefined Cupressus to exclude Chamaecyparis, but to
include the Nootka cypress.[14][15] It may be added that attempts to cross
Nootka cypress with other Chamaecyparis species have been universally
unsuccessful. Where Nootka cypress is treated in Chamaecyparis, the name of
the hybrid becomes xCupressocyparis leylandii, and where treated in
Xanthocyparis, the hybrid becomes xCuprocyparis leylandii.[16]

Two other similar hybrids have also been raised, both involving Nootka cypress
with other Cupressus species:  

    Cupressus arizonica var. glabra x Cupressus nootkatensis (Cupressus x notabilis)
    Cupressus lusitanica x Cupressus nootkatensis (Cupressus x ovensii)

## Adaptation[edit]

Leyland cypress is light-demanding but is tolerant of high levels of pollution
and salt spray. A hardy, fast-growing natural hybrid, it thrives on a variety
of soils and sites are commonly planted in gardens to provide a quick boundary
or shelter hedge, because of their rapid growth. Although widely used for
screening, it has not been planted much for forestry purposes. In both forms
of the hybrid, Leyland cypress combines the hardiness of the Nootka or Alaska
cypress with the fast growth of the Monterey cypress.[5]

The tallest Leyland cypress presently documented is about 40 metres (130 ft)
tall and still growing.[17] However, because their roots are relatively
shallow, large leylandii tend to topple over. The shallow root structure also
means that it is poorly adapted to areas with hot summers, such as the
southern half of the United States. In these areas it is prone to develop
cypress canker disease, which is caused by the fungus Seiridium cardinale.
Canker causes extensive dieback and ultimately kills the tree. In California's
Central Valley, they rarely live more than ten years before succumbing, and
not much longer in southern states like Alabama. In these areas, the canker-
resistant Arizona cypress is much more successful. In Northern areas where
heavy snows occur, this plant is also susceptible to broken branches and
uprooting in wet, heavy snow. The tree has also been introduced in Kenya on
parts of Mount Kenya.

The sap can cause skin irritation in susceptible individuals.[18]

## Commercialization[edit]

Leylandii used as windbreak

In 1925, a firm of commercial nurserymen specialising in conifers were looking
for a breed which was fast-growing, and could be deployed in hard to grow
windy and salty areas such as Cornwall. Eventually they found the six original
trees developed by Leyland, and began propagating the species.[19] In 1953, a
freak tornado blew down one of the original trees at Haggerston (the other
original five trees still survive), on which the research division of the
Forestry Commission started developing additional hybrids. Commercial
nurseries spotted the plant's potential, and for many years it was the
biggest-selling item in every garden centre in Great Britain, making up to 10%
of their total sales.[17]

It continues to be a popular plant for cultivation in parks and gardens. The
cultivar 'Gold Rider'[20] has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award
of Garden Merit (confirmed 2017),[21] though the original hybrid has now lost
its AGM status.[22]

## Legal aspects[edit]

The plant's rapid growth (up to a metre per year) and great potential height -
often over 20 metres (66 ft) tall, sometimes as high as 35 metres (115 ft) -
can become a serious problem. In 2005 in the United Kingdom, an estimated
17,000 people were at loggerheads over high hedges, which led to violence and
in at least one case murder, when in 2001, retired Environment Agency officer
Llandis Burdon, 57, was shot dead after an alleged dispute over a leylandii
hedge in Talybont-on-Usk, Powys.[17]

Part VIII of the United Kingdom's Anti-Social Behaviour Act 2003, introduced
in 2005, gave a way for people affected by high hedges (usually, but not
necessarily, of leylandii) to ask their local authority to investigate
complaints about the hedges, and gave the authorities in England and Wales
power to have the hedges reduced in height.[23] In May 2008, UK resident
Christine Wright won a 24-year legal battle to have her neighbour's leylandii
trees cut down for blocking sunlight to her garden.[24]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ a b Mark A. Garland; Gerry Moore (2012). "xHesperotropsis, a new nothogenus for intergeneric crosses between Hesperocyparis and Callitropsis (Cupressaceae), and a review of the complicated nomenclatural history of the Leyland cypress". Taxon. 61 (3): 667-670.
  2. ^ John Hillier; Allen J. Coombes, eds. (2007). The Hillier Manual of Trees & Shrubs. David and Charles. p. 436\. ISBN 9780715326640.
  3. ^ "Plymouth neighbours row over 35ft trees". BBC News. September 7, 2010. Retrieved November 30, 2013.
  4. ^ "Leighton Hall - A History". Mid Wales. BBC. March 25, 2008. Archived from the original on October 6, 2011. Retrieved November 29, 2008.
  5. ^ a b c d "Leyland cypress - x Cupressocyparis leylandii". Royal Forestry Society. Archived from the original on February 15, 2011. Retrieved November 30, 2008.
  6. ^ Ian Whitehead (June 13, 2013). ""Turbinia" at speed - but who's on the conning tower?". Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums. Retrieved June 19, 2013. This examines Charles Leyland's connections with the sea and Northumberland.
  7. ^ Armitage, James (2011). "The fertility of leyland cypress". Plantsman (Lond.). 10: 254-256. Retrieved Feb 11, 2015.
  8. ^ Yixuan, Kou; Huiying, Shang; Kangshan, Mao; Zhonghu, Li; Keith, Rushforth; Robert, Adams (2014). "Nuclear and Cytoplasmic DNA Sequence Data Further Illuminate the Genetic Composition of Leyland Cypresses" (PDF). Journal of the American Society for Horticultural Science. 139 (5): 558-566. Retrieved Feb 11, 2015.
  9. ^ a b "Cupressocyparis leylandii" Archived 2012-06-04 at the Wayback Machine. zipcodezoo Accessed 9 March 2009
  10. ^ "x Cuppressocyparis leylandii 'Naylor's Blue'" Archived 2009-04-29 at the Wayback Machine. uah.edu Accessed 9 March 2009
  11. ^ Gerd Krussmann (1995). Manual of Cultivated Conifers. Portland, Oregon: Timber Press. p. 101\. ISBN 9780881920079.
  12. ^ Damon P. Little; Andrea E. Schwarzbach; Robert P. Adams; Chang-Fu Hsieh (2004). "The circumscription and phylogenetic relationships of Callitropsis and the newly described genus Xanthocyparis (Cupressaceae)". American Journal of Botany. 91 (11): 1872-1881. doi:10.3732/ajb.91.11.1872. PMID 21652334.
  13. ^ Damon P. Little (2006). "Evolution and circumscription of the true cypresses (Cupressaceae: Cupressus)". Systematic Botany. 31 (3): 461-480. doi:10.1043/05-33.1. JSTOR 25064176.
  14. ^ Kangshan Mao; Gang Hao; Jianquan Liu; Robert P. Adams; Richard I. Milne (2010). "Diversification and biogeography of Juniperus (Cupressaceae): variable diversification rates and multiple intercontinental dispersals". New Phytologist. 188 (1): 254-272. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03351.x. PMID 20561210.
  15. ^ Christopher J. Earle (ed.). "Cupressus Linnaeus 1753, p. 1002". The Gymnosperm Database. Retrieved November 30, 2013.
  16. ^ Robert R. Mill; Aljas Farjon (2006). "Proposal to conserve the name Xanthocyparis against Callitropsis Oerst. (Cupressaceae)". Taxon. 55 (1): 229-231. JSTOR 25065550.
  17. ^ a b c Rhodri Clark (January 26, 2008). "Mother of all trees that sets neighbours at war revealed to have its accidental roots in Wales". Western Mail. Retrieved November 30, 2008.
  18. ^ Dietrich Frohne; Hans Jurgen Pfander (2005). Poisonous plants: a handbook for doctors, pharmacists, toxicologists, biologists and veterinarians (2nd ed.). Timber Press. p. 155\. ISBN 9780881927504.
  19. ^ "TRACING GREEN GIANT BACK TO CASTLE ROOTS". Northern Echo. 2000-07-21. Retrieved 2008-11-30.
  20. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - x Cuprocyparis leylandii 'Gold Rider'". Retrieved 9 June 2013.
  21. ^ "AGM Plants - Ornamental" (PDF). Royal Horticultural Society. July 2017. p. 22. Retrieved 24 January 2018.
  22. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cuprocyparis leylandii". Retrieved 9 June 2013.
  23. ^ Jonathan Duffy (May 31, 2005). "Fir extinguisher". BBC News. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
  24. ^ Richard Savill (May 17, 2008). "Leylandii dispute ends in light relief". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved December 30, 2009.

## External links[edit]

  * Media related to Cupressus x leylandii at Wikimedia Commons

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q1290970
  * GBIF: 3611465
  * GRIN: 404809
  * IPNI: 676759-1
  * NZOR: ef5bf002-03d0-4c25-ba09-4c921bb8f811
  * Plant List: kew-2748710
  * Tropicos: 50301450
  * uBio: 5882597

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leyland_cypress&oldid=846647573"

Categories:

  * Cupressus
  * Hybrid plants
  * Trees of Wales
  * Flora of the West Coast of the United States
  * Garden plants of North America
  * Drought-tolerant plants
  * Ornamental trees
  * Plants described in 1926

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Languages

  * Boarisch
  * Catala
  * Cestina
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Gaeilge
  * Italiano
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Tieng Viet

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 20 June 2018, at 02:20 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

