# Fitzroya

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Fitzroya cupressoides)

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article is about the tree. For the name, see Fitzroy.

Fitzroya  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Endangered (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Subfamily: Callitroideae  
Genus: Fitzroya  
Hook. f. ex Lindl.  
Species:  F. cupressoides  
Binomial name  
Fitzroya cupressoides  
I.M.Johnst.  
Distribution of F. cupressoides in South-Central Chile (red)  
  
Fitzroya is a monotypic genus in the cypress family. The single living
species, Fitzroya cupressoides, is a tall, long-lived conifer native to the
Andes mountains of southern Chile and Argentina, where it is an important
member of the Valdivian temperate rain forests. Common names include alerce
("larch" in Spanish), lahuan (Spanish, from the Mapuche Native American name
lawal), and Patagonian cypress. The genus was named in honour of Robert
FitzRoy.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 History
  * 3 See also
  * 4 References
  * 5 Bibliography
  * 6 External links

## Description[edit]

Fitzroya cupressoides is the largest tree species in South America, normally
growing to 40-60 m, but occasionally more than 70 m, and up to 5 m in trunk
diameter. Its rough pyramidal canopy provides cover for the southern beech,
laurel and myrtle. The largest known living specimen is Alerce Milenario in
Alerce Costero National Park, Chile. It is more than 60 m tall, with a trunk
diameter of 4.26 m. Much larger specimens existed before the species was
heavily logged in the 19th and 20th centuries; Charles Darwin reported finding
a specimen 12.6 m in diameter.

The leaves are in decussate whorls of three, 3-6 mm long (to 8 mm long on
seedlings) and 2 mm broad, marked with two white stomatal lines. The cones are
globose, 6-8 mm in diameter, opening flat to 12 mm across, with nine scales in
three whorls of three. Only the central whorl of scales is fertile, bearing
2-3 seeds on each scale; the lower and upper whorls are small and sterile. The
seeds are 2-3 mm long and flat, with a wing along each side. The seeds mature
6-8 months after pollination.

The thick bark of F. cupressoides may be an adaptation to wildfire.[2]

In 1993 a specimen from Chile, "Gran Abuelo" or "Alerce Milenario", was found
to be 3622 years old, making it the second oldest fully verified (by counting
growth rings) age for any living tree species, after the bristlecone pine.[3]

A team of researchers from the University of Tasmania found fossilized foliage
of a Fitzroya species on the Lea River of northwest Tasmania.[4] The
35-million-year-old (Oligocene) fossil was named F. tasmanensis. The finding
demonstrates the ancient floristic affinities between Australasia and southern
South America, which botanists identify as the Antarctic flora.

About 40 to 50 thousand years ago, during the interstadials of the Llanquihue
glaciation, Fitzroya and other conifers had a much larger and contineous
geographical extent than at present including the eastern lowlands of Chiloe
Island and the area west of Llanquihue Lake. At present Fitzroya grow mainly
at some altitude above sea level. Fitzroya stands near sea level are most
likely relicts.[5]

Fitzroya cupressoides first-year seedling

## History[edit]

Fitzroya cupressoides wood has been found in the site of Monte Verde, implying
that it has been used since at least 13,000 years before present. The
Huilliche people are known to have used the wood for making tools and
weapons.[6]

By the time of the Spanish conquest of Chiloe Archipelago in 1567 most of the
islands were covered by dense forest where F. cupressoides grew.[7] The wood
was economically important in colonial Chiloe and Valdivia, which exported
planks to Peru.[8] A single tree could yield 600 planks with a width of at
least 0.5 m and a length of 5 m.[7] The wood was highly valued in Chile and
Peru for its elasticity and lightness.[6] With the destruction of Valdivia in
1599 Chiloe gained increased importance as the only locale that could supply
the Viceroyalty of Peru with F. cupressoides wood, the first large shipment of
which left Chiloe in 1641.[7]

Fitzroya cupressoides wood was the principal means of exchange in the trade
with Peru, and even came to be used as a local currency, the real de alerce,
in Chiloe Archipelago.[6] It has been argued that the Spanish enclave of
Chiloe prevailed over other Spanish settlements in Southern Chile due to the
importance of alerce trade.[6][9]

Fitzroya forest at Alerce Costero National Park, Chile.

From about 1750 to 1943, when the land between Maullin River and Valdivia was
colonized by Spain and then Chile, numerous fires of Fitzroya woods occurred
in Cordillera Pelada. These fires were initiated by Spaniards, Chileans and
Europeans. Earlier, from 1397 to 1750 the Fitzroya woods of Cordillera Pelada
also suffered from fires that originated from lightning strikes and indigenous
inhabitants.[10]

In the 1850s and 1860s Vicente Perez Rosales burned down huge tracts of
forested lands to provide cleared lands for German settlers in Southern
Chile.[11] The area affected by the fires of Perez Rosales spanned a strip in
the Andean foothills from Bueno River to Reloncavi Sound.[11] One of the most
famous intentional fires was the one of the Fitzroya forests between Puerto
Varas and Puerto Montt in 1863.[12] This burning was done taking advantage of
a drought in 1863.[12] Burnings of forest were in many cases necessary for the
survival of the settlers who had no means of subsistence other than
agriculture.[12]

Logging of Fitzroya continued until 1976[13] when it became forbidden by law,
although illegal logging still occasionally occurs.

## See also[edit]

  * List of superlative trees
  * Nadi

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Premoli, A., Quiroga, P., Souto, C. & Gardner, M. (2013). Fitzroya cupressoides. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2014.2.
  2. ^ Veblen, Thomas T.; Kitzberger, Thomas; Burns, Bruce R.; Rebertus, Alan J. (1995). "Perturbaciones y dinamica de regeneracion en bosques andinos del sur de Chile y Argentina" [Natural disturbance and regeneration dynamics in Andean forests of southern Chile and Argentina]. In Armesto, Juan J.; Villagran, Carolina; Arroyo, Mary Kalin. Ecologia de los bosques nativos de Chile (in Spanish). Santiago de Chile: Editorial Universitaria. pp. 169-198. ISBN 9561112841.
  3. ^ Lara, A; Villalba, R (1993). "A 3620-Year Temperature Record from Fitzroya cupressoides Tree Rings in Southern South America". Science. 260 (5111): 1104-6. doi:10.1126/science.260.5111.1104. PMID 17806339.
  4. ^ Hill, R. S.; Whang, S. S. (1996). "A new species of Fitzroya (Cupressaceae) from Oligocene sediments in north-western Tasmania". Australian Systematic Botany. 9 (6): 867. doi:10.1071/SB9960867.
  5. ^ Villagran, Carolina; Leon, Ana; Roig, Fidel A. (2004). "Paleodistribution of the alerce and cypres of the Guaitecas during the interstadial stages of the Llanquihue Glaciation: Llanquihue and Chiloe provinces, Los Lagos Region, Chile". Revista geologica de Chile. 31 (1): 133-151. Retrieved 13 November 2015.
  6. ^ a b c d Urbina, Ximena (2011). "Analisis Historico-Cultural del alerce en la Patagonia Septentrional Occidental, Chiloe, siglos XVI al XIX" (PDF). Magallania. 39 (2): 57-73.
  7. ^ a b c Torrejon g, F.; Cisternas v, M.; Alvial c, I.; Torres r, L. (2011). "Consecuencias de la tala maderera colonial en los bosques de alerce de Chiloe, sur de Chile (Siglos XVI-XIX)". Magallania (Punta Arenas). 39 (2): 75. doi:10.4067/S0718-22442011000200006.
  8. ^ Villalobos et al. 1974, p. 225.
  9. ^ Otero 2006, p. 73.
  10. ^ Lara, A.; Fraver, S.; Aravena, J.C.; Wolodarsky-Franke, F. (1999), "Fire and the dynamics of Fitzroya cupressoides (alerce) forests of Chile's Cordillera Pelada", Ecoscience, 6 (1): 100-109, archived from the original on 2014-08-27
  11. ^ a b Villalobos et al. 1974, p. 457.
  12. ^ a b c Otero 2006, p. 86.
  13. ^ Devall, M. S.; Parresol, B. R.; Armesto, J. J. (1998). "Dendroecological analysis of a Fitzroya cupressoides and a Nothofagus nitida stand in the Cordillera Pelada, Chile". Forest Ecology and Management. 108: 135. doi:10.1016/S0378-1127(98)00221-7.

## Bibliography[edit]

  * Otero, Luis (2006). La huella del fuego: Historia de los bosques nativos. Poblamiento y cambios en el paisaje del sur de Chile. Pehuen Editores. ISBN 956-16-0409-4.
  * Villalobos R., Sergio; Silva G., Osvaldo; Silva V., Fernando; Estelle M., Patricio (1974). Historia de Chile (1995 ed.). Editorial Universitaria. ISBN 956-11-1163-2.
  * T.T. Veblen, B.R. Burns, T. Kitzberger, A. Lara and R. Villalba (1995) The ecology of the conifers of southern South America. Pages 120-155 in: N. Enright and R. Hill (eds.), Ecology of the Southern Conifers. Melbourne University Press.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fitzroya cupressoides.  
  
  * Fitzroya cupressoides in Chilebosque (Spanish)
  * Fitzroya cupressoides in Encyclopedia of the Chilean Flora (Spanish)
  * Gymnosperm Database - Fitzroya cupressoides
  * Conifers Around the World: Fitzroya cupressoides - Alerce
  * ents-bbs.org / Tall trees in Chile and Argentina?
  * ents-bbs.org / Chile Trip Part 3: Parque Nacional Alerce Andino

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Fitzroya cupressoides

  * Wikidata: Q847304
  * Wikispecies: Fitzroya cupressoides
  * ARKive: fitzroya-cupressoides
  * Conifers.org: Fitzroya
  * EoL: 1034864
  * EPPO: FIZCU
  * GBIF: 2684353
  * GRIN: 17114
  * iNaturalist: 135931
  * IPNI: 105034-2
  * IRMNG: 10801677
  * ITIS: 194880
  * IUCN: 30926
  * NCBI: 103972
  * NZOR: 7b82ef35-037f-44a7-8689-85e009d5ca36
  * PfaF: Fitzroya cupressoides
  * Plant List: kew-2813201
  * PLANTS: FICU2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:105034-2
  * Species+: 27947
  * Tropicos: 9400406
  * WCSP: 385383

  
  
Fitzroya

  * Wikidata: Q12981821
  * Wikispecies: Fitzroya
  * EPPO: 1FIZG
  * Fossilworks: 315288
  * GBIF: 2684352
  * GRIN: 17306
  * iNaturalist: 129792
  * IPNI: 13466-1
  * IRMNG: 1013187
  * ITIS: 194878
  * NCBI: 103971
  * NZOR: 6fc96ba8-0ca8-4442-b1b0-fe616ee03af6
  * PLANTS: FITZR
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:13466-1
  * Tropicos: 40038274

  
  
Pinus cupressoides

  * Wikidata: Q17363885
  * GBIF: 5284293
  * GRIN: 28434
  * IPNI: 196966-2
  * Tropicos: 50183121

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fitzroya&oldid=851462807"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List endangered species
  * Cupressaceae
  * Monotypic conifer genera
  * Flora of the Andes
  * Trees of Argentina
  * Trees of Chile
  * Flora of central Chile
  * Endangered flora of South America

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars using multiple manual Wikidata items
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Francais
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * ????
  * ????? ????
  * Letzebuergesch
  * Lietuviu
  * Nederlands
  * Norsk
  * ????? ????
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 22 July 2018, at 13:17 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

