# Sequoiadendron giganteum

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article is about the species commonly called "giant sequoia". For the
species commonly called "coast redwood", see Sequoia sempervirens. For other
uses, see Sequoia (disambiguation).

Sequoiadendron giganteum  
The "Grizzly Giant" in the Mariposa Grove, Yosemite National Park  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Endangered (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Sequoiadendron  
Species:  S. giganteum  
Binomial name  
Sequoiadendron giganteum  
(Lindl.) J.Buchh.  
Natural range of the California members of the Sequoioideae subfamily

red - Sequoiadendron giganteum

green - Sequoia sempervirens  
  
Sequoiadendron giganteum (giant sequoia; also known as giant redwood, Sierra
redwood, Sierran redwood, Wellingtonia or simply Big Tree--a nickname used by
John Muir[2]) is the sole living species in the genus Sequoiadendron, and one
of three species of coniferous trees known as redwoods, classified in the
family Cupressaceae in the subfamily Sequoioideae, together with Sequoia
sempervirens (coast redwood) and Metasequoia glyptostroboides (dawn redwood).
The common use of the name sequoia generally refers to Sequoiadendron
giganteum, which occurs naturally only in groves on the western slopes of the
Sierra Nevada Mountains of California.

The etymology of the genus name has been presumed--initially in The Yosemite
Book by Josiah Whitney in 1868[3]--to be in honor of Sequoyah (1767-1843), who
was the inventor of the Cherokee syllabary.[4] An etymological study published
in 2012, however, concluded that the name was more likely to have originated
from the Latin sequi (meaning to follow) since the number of seeds per cone in
the newly-classified genus fell in mathematical sequence with the other four
genera in the suborder.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Biology
  * 3 Distribution
  * 4 Ecology
  * 5 Discovery and naming
  * 6 Uses
  * 7 Cultivation
    * 7.1 Europe
    * 7.2 United States and Canada
    * 7.3 Australia
    * 7.4 New Zealand
  * 8 Superlatives
    * 8.1 Largest by trunk volume
    * 8.2 Tallest
    * 8.3 Oldest
    * 8.4 Greatest girth
    * 8.5 Greatest base diameter
    * 8.6 Greatest mean diameter at breast height
    * 8.7 Largest limb
    * 8.8 Thickest bark
  * 9 See also
  * 10 Notes
  * 11 References
  * 12 Sources
  * 13 Further reading
  * 14 External links

## Description[edit]

Leaves of Sequoiadendron giganteum

Giant sequoias are the world's largest single trees. Giant sequoias grow to an
average height of 50-85 m (164-279 ft) and 6-8 m (20-26 ft) in diameter.
Record trees have been measured to be 94.8 m (311 ft) in height. Claims of 17
m (56 ft) diameter have been touted by taking an author's writing[6] out of
context, but the widest known at chest height is closer to 8.2 m (27 ft).
Between 2014 and 2016, specimens of coast redwood were found to have larger
trunk diameters than all known giant sequoias[7]. However, the trunks of
redwoods taper more quickly, whereas sequoias have more columnar boles that
maintain greater girth higher up in the tree.

The oldest known giant sequoia based on ring count is 3,500 years old. Giant
sequoias are among the oldest living things on Earth. Sequoia bark is fibrous,
furrowed, and may be 90 cm (3 ft) thick at the base of the columnar trunk. It
provides significant fire protection for the trees. The leaves are evergreen,
awl-shaped, 3-6 mm (1/8-1/4 in) long, and arranged spirally on the shoots. The
seed cones are 4-7 cm (1 1/2-3 in) long and mature in 18-20 months, though
they typically remain green and closed for up to 20 years; each cone has 30-50
spirally arranged scales, with several seeds on each scale, giving an average
of 230 seeds per cone. The seed is dark brown, 4-5 mm (0.16-0.20 in) long and
1 mm (0.04 in) broad, with a 1-millimeter (0.04 in) wide, yellow-brown wing
along each side. Some seeds are shed when the cone scales shrink during hot
weather in late summer, but most are liberated when the cone dries from fire
heat or is damaged by insects.

Giant sequoia cones and seed

The giant sequoia regenerates by seed. Young trees start to bear cones at the
age of 12 years. Trees up to about 20 years old may produce stump sprouts
subsequent to injury, but unlike coast redwoods, shoots do not form on the
stumps of mature trees. Giant sequoias of all ages may sprout from their boles
when branches are lost to fire or breakage.

At any given time, a large tree may be expected to have about 11,000 cones.
Cone production is greatest in the upper portion of the canopy. A mature giant
sequoia has been estimated to disperse 300,000-400,000 seeds per year. The
winged seeds may be carried up to 180 m (590 ft) from the parent tree.

Lower branches die fairly readily from shading, but trees less than 100 years
old retain most of their dead branches. Trunks of mature trees in groves are
generally free of branches to a height of 20-50 m (70-160 ft), but solitary
trees will retain low branches.

## Biology[edit]

Because of its size, the tree has been studied for its water pull. Water from
the roots can be pushed up only a few meters by osmotic pressure but can reach
extreme heights by using a system of branching capillarity (capillary action)
in the tree's xylem (the water tubules) and sub-pressure from evaporating
water at the leaves.[8] Sequoias supplement water from the soil with fog,
taken up through air roots, at heights to where the root water cannot be
pulled.[9]

## Distribution[edit]

The Generals Highway passes between giant sequoias in Sequoia National Park

The natural distribution of giant sequoias is restricted to a limited area of
the western Sierra Nevada, California. They occur in scattered groves, with a
total of 68 groves (see list of sequoia groves for a full inventory),
comprising a total area of only 144.16 km2 (35,620 acres). Nowhere does it
grow in pure stands, although in a few small areas, stands do approach a pure
condition. The northern two-thirds of its range, from the American River in
Placer County southward to the Kings River, has only eight disjunct groves.
The remaining southern groves are concentrated between the Kings River and the
Deer Creek Grove in southern Tulare County. Groves range in size from 12.4 km2
(3,100 acres) with 20,000 mature trees, to small groves with only six living
trees. Many are protected in Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks and Giant
Sequoia National Monument.

The giant sequoia is usually found in a humid climate characterized by dry
summers and snowy winters. Most giant sequoia groves are on granitic-based
residual and alluvial soils. The elevation of the giant sequoia groves
generally ranges from 1,400-2,000 m (4,600-6,600 ft) in the north, to
1,700-2,150 metres (5,580-7,050 ft) to the south. Giant sequoias generally
occur on the south-facing sides of northern mountains, and on the northern
faces of more southerly slopes.

High levels of reproduction are not necessary to maintain the present
population levels. Few groves, however, have sufficient young trees to
maintain the present density of mature giant sequoias for the future. The
majority of giant sequoias are currently undergoing a gradual decline in
density since European settlement.

While the present day distribution of this species is limited to a small area
of California, it was once much more widely distributed in prehistoric times,
and was a reasonably common species in North American and Eurasian coniferous
forests until its range was greatly reduced by the last ice age. Older fossil
specimens reliably identified as giant sequoia have been found in Cretaceous
era sediments from a number of sites in North America and Europe, and even as
far afield as New Zealand[10] and Australia.[11]

A group of sequoias was planted and is naturally propagating on Mount San
Jacinto in Riverside County, southern California. The trees were planted by
the United States Forest Service after a 1974 wildfire.[12]

## Ecology[edit]

Two giant sequoias, Sequoia National Park. Note the large fire scar at the
base of the right-hand tree; fires do not typically kill the trees but do
remove competing thin-barked species, and aid giant sequoia regeneration.

Giant sequoias are in many ways adapted to forest fires. Their bark is
unusually fire resistant, and their cones will normally open immediately after
a fire.[13] The giant sequoias are having difficulty reproducing in their
original habitat (and very rarely reproduce in cultivation) due to the seeds
only being able to grow successfully in full sun and in mineral-rich soils,
free from competing vegetation. Although the seeds can germinate in moist
needle humus in the spring, these seedlings will die as the duff dries in the
summer. They therefore require periodic wildfire to clear competing vegetation
and soil humus before successful regeneration can occur. Without fire, shade-
loving species will crowd out young sequoia seedlings, and sequoia seeds will
not germinate. When fully grown, these trees typically require large amounts
of water and are therefore often concentrated near streams.

Fires also bring hot air high into the canopy via convection, which in turn
dries and opens the cones. The subsequent release of large quantities of seeds
coincides with the optimal postfire seedbed conditions. Loose ground ash may
also act as a cover to protect the fallen seeds from ultraviolet radiation
damage.

Due to fire suppression efforts and livestock grazing during the early and mid
20th century, low-intensity fires no longer occurred naturally in many groves,
and still do not occur in some groves today. The suppression of fires also led
to ground fuel build-up and the dense growth of fire-sensitive white fir. This
increased the risk of more intense fires that can use the firs as ladders to
threaten mature giant sequoia crowns. Natural fires may also be important in
keeping carpenter ants in check.

In 1970, the National Park Service began controlled burns of its groves to
correct these problems. Current policies also allow natural fires to burn. One
of these untamed burns severely damaged the second-largest tree in the world,
the Washington tree, in September 2003, 45 days after the fire started. This
damage made it unable to withstand the snowstorm of January 2005, leading to
the collapse of over half the trunk.

In addition to fire, two animal agents also assist giant sequoia seed release.
The more significant of the two is a longhorn beetle (Phymatodes nitidus) that
lays eggs on the cones, into which the larvae then bore holes. This cuts the
vascular water supply to the cone scales, allowing the cones to dry and open
for the seeds to fall. Cones damaged by the beetles during the summer will
slowly open over the next several months. Some research indicates many cones,
particularly higher in the crowns, may need to be partially dried by beetle
damage before fire can fully open them. The other agent is the Douglas
squirrel (Tamiasciurus douglasi) that gnaws on the fleshy green scales of
younger cones. The squirrels are active year round, and some seeds are
dislodged and dropped as the cone is eaten.[14]

## Discovery and naming[edit]

Shortly after their discovery by Europeans, giant sequoias were subject to
much exhibition

The giant sequoia was well known to Native American tribes living in its area.
Native American names for the species include wawona, toos-pung-ish and hea-
mi-withic, the latter two in the language of the Tule River Tribe.

The first reference to the giant sequoia by Europeans is in 1833, in the diary
of the explorer J. K. Leonard; the reference does not mention any locality,
but his route would have taken him through the Calaveras Grove.[15] This
discovery was not publicized. The next European to see the species was John M.
Wooster, who carved his initials in the bark of the 'Hercules' tree in the
Calaveras Grove in 1850; again, this received no publicity. Much more
publicity was given to the "discovery" by Augustus T. Dowd of the Calaveras
Grove in 1852, and this is commonly cited as the species' discovery.[15] The
tree found by Dowd, christened the 'Discovery Tree', was felled in 1853.

The first scientific naming of the species was by John Lindley in December
1853, who named it Wellingtonia gigantea, without realizing this was an
invalid name under the botanical code as the name Wellingtonia had already
been used earlier for another unrelated plant (Wellingtonia arnottiana in the
family Sabiaceae). The name "Wellingtonia" has persisted in England as a
common name.[16] The following year, Joseph Decaisne transferred it to the
same genus as the coast redwood, naming it Sequoia gigantea, but again this
name was invalid, having been applied earlier (in 1847, by Endlicher) to the
coast redwood. The name Washingtonia californica was also applied to it by
Winslow in 1854, though this too is invalid, belonging to the palm genus
Washingtonia.

Clothespin tree in the Mariposa Grove, Yosemite National Park

In 1907, it was placed by Carl Ernst Otto Kuntze in the otherwise fossil genus
Steinhauera, but doubt as to whether the giant sequoia is related to the
fossil originally so named makes this name invalid.

The nomenclatural oversights were finally corrected in 1939 by J. Buchholz,
who also pointed out the giant sequoia is distinct from the coast redwood at
the genus level and coined the name Sequoiadendron giganteum for it.

The etymology of the genus name has been presumed--initially in The Yosemite
Book by Josiah Whitney in 1868[3]--to be in honor of Sequoyah (1767-1843), who
was the inventor of the Cherokee syllabary.[4] An etymological study published
in 2012, however, concluded that the name was more likely to have originated
from the Latin sequi (meaning to follow) since the number of seeds per cone in
the newly-classified genus fell in mathematical sequence with the other four
genera in the suborder.[5]

John Muir wrote of the species in about 1870:

> "Do behold the King in his glory, King Sequoia! Behold! Behold! seems all I
can say. Some time ago I left all for Sequoia and have been and am at his
feet, fasting and praying for light, for is he not the greatest light in the
woods, in the world? Where are such columns of sunshine, tangible, accessible,
terrestrialized?' [17]

## Uses[edit]

Wood from mature giant sequoias is highly resistant to decay, but due to being
fibrous and brittle, it is generally unsuitable for construction. From the
1880s through the 1920s, logging took place in many groves in spite of
marginal commercial returns. The Hume-Bennett Lumber Company was the last to
harvest giant sequoia, going out of business in 1924.[18] Due to their weight
and brittleness, trees would often shatter when they hit the ground, wasting
much of the wood. Loggers attempted to cushion the impact by digging trenches
and filling them with branches. Still, as little as 50% of the timber is
estimated to have made it from groves to the mill. The wood was used mainly
for shingles and fence posts, or even for matchsticks.

Pictures of the once majestic trees broken and abandoned in formerly pristine
groves, and the thought of the giants put to such modest use, spurred the
public outcry that caused most of the groves to be preserved as protected
land. The public can visit an example of 1880s clear-cutting at Big Stump
Grove near General Grant Grove. As late as the 1980s, some immature trees were
logged in Sequoia National Forest, publicity of which helped lead to the
creation of Giant Sequoia National Monument.[citation needed]

The wood from immature trees is less brittle, with recent tests on young
plantation-grown trees showing it similar to coast redwood wood in quality.
This is resulting in some interest in cultivating giant sequoia as a very
high-yielding timber crop tree, both in California and also in parts of
western Europe, where it may grow more efficiently than coast redwoods. In the
northwest United States, some entrepreneurs have also begun growing giant
sequoias for Christmas trees. Besides these attempts at tree farming, the
principal economic uses for giant sequoia today are tourism and horticulture.

## Cultivation[edit]

The well-known giant sequoia avenue planted in 1863 at Benmore Botanic Garden,
Scotland. These trees are all over 50 metres (160 ft) tall.

Giant sequoia is a very popular ornamental tree in many areas. It is
successfully grown in most of western and southern Europe, the Pacific
Northwest of North America north to southwest British Columbia, the southern
United States, southeast Australia, New Zealand and central-southern Chile. It
is also grown, though less successfully, in parts of eastern North America.

Trees can withstand temperatures of -31 ?C (-25 ?F) or colder for short
periods of time, provided the ground around the roots is insulated with either
heavy snow or mulch. Outside its natural range, the foliage can suffer from
damaging windburn.

A wide range of horticultural varieties have been selected, especially in
Europe, including blue, compact blue, powder blue, hazel smith, pendulum--or
weeping--varieties, and grafted cultivars.[19]

### Europe[edit]

Sequoias in Eurodisney (near Paris) in 2009 and 2017

The giant sequoia was first brought into cultivation in Britain in 1853 by the
horticulturist Patrick Matthew of Perthshire from seeds sent by his botanist
son John in California.[20] A much larger shipment of seed collected from the
Calaveras Grove by William Lobb, acting for the Veitch Nursery near Exeter,
arrived in England in December 1853;[21] seed from this batch was widely
distributed throughout Europe.

The tallest giant sequoia ever measured outside of the United States[22] is a
specimen planted near Ribeauville in France in 1856 and measured in 2014 at a
height between 57.7 m (189 ft)[23] and 58.1 m (191 ft)[24] at age 158 years.

Growth in Britain is very fast, with the tallest tree, at Benmore in southwest
Scotland, reaching 56.4 m (185 ft) in 2014 at age 150 years,[25] and several
others from 50-53 m (164-174 ft) tall; the stoutest is around 12 m (39 ft) in
girth and 4 m (13 ft) in diameter, in Perthshire. The Royal Botanic Gardens at
Kew in London also contains a large specimen. Biddulph Grange Garden in
Staffordshire holds a fine collection of both Sequoiadendron giganteum and
also Sequoia sempervirens (Coast Redwood). The General Sherman of California
has a volume of 1,489 m3 (52,600 cu ft); by way of comparison, the largest
giant sequoias in Great Britain have volumes no greater than 90-100 m3
(3,200-3,500 cu ft), one example being the 90 m3 (3,200 cu ft) specimen in the
New Forest.

Sequoiadendron giganteum at New Forest, Hampshire, England, one of the tallest
in the UK at 52.73 m (173.0 ft).[26]

Numerous giant sequoia were planted in Italy from 1860 through 1905. Several
regions contain specimens that range from 40 to 48 metres (131 to 157 ft) in
height. The largest tree is in Roccavione, in the Piedmont, with a basal
circumference of 16 metres (52 ft). One notable tree survived a 200-metre (660
ft) tall flood wave in 1963 that was caused by a landslide at Vajont Dam.
There are numerous giant sequoia in parks and reserves.[27]

Growth rates in some areas of Europe are remarkable. One young tree in Italy
reached 22 m (72 ft) tall and 88 cm (2.89 ft) trunk diameter in 17 years
(Mitchell, 1972).

Growth further northeast in Europe is limited by winter cold. In Denmark,
where extreme winters can reach -32 ?C (-26 ?F), the largest tree was 35 m
(115 ft) tall and 1.7 m (5.6 ft) diameter in 1976 and is bigger today. One in
Poland has purportedly survived temperatures down to -37 ?C (-35 ?F) with
heavy snow cover.

Two members of the German Dendrology Society, E. J. Martin and Illa Martin,
introduced the giant sequoia into German forestry at the Sequoiafarm
Kaldenkirchen in 1952.[28]

Twenty-nine giant sequoias, measuring around 30 m (98 ft) in height, grow in
Belgrade's municipality of Lazarevac in Serbia.[29]

The oldest sequoiadendron in the Czech Republic, at 44 m (144 ft), grows in
Ratmerice u Votic castle garden.

### United States and Canada[edit]

Unopened pollen (male) cones of cultivated tree in Portland, Oregon, USA
(fall)

Immature seed (female) cones of cultivated tree in Portland, Oregon, USA
(fall)

Giant sequoias are grown successfully in the Pacific Northwest and southern
US, and less successfully in eastern North America. Giant sequoia cultivation
is very successful in the Pacific Northwest from western Oregon north to
southwest British Columbia, with fast growth rates. In Washington and Oregon,
it is common to find giant sequoias that have been successfully planted in
both urban and rural areas. In the Seattle area, large specimens exceeding 90
ft (27 m) are fairly common and exist in several city parks and many private
yards (especially east Seattle including Capitol Hill, Washington Park, &
Leschi/Madrona, as well as Tacoma's Jefferson Park).

In the northeastern US there has been some limited success in growing the
species, but growth is much slower there, and it is prone to Cercospora and
Kabatina fungal diseases due to the hot, humid summer climate there. A tree at
Blithewold Gardens, in Bristol, Rhode Island is reported to be 27 metres (89
ft) tall, reportedly the tallest in the New England states.[30][31] The tree
at the Tyler Arboretum in Delaware County, Pennsylvania at 29.1 metres (95 ft)
may be the tallest in the northeast.[32] Specimens also grow in the Arnold
Arboretum in Boston, Massachusetts (planted 1972, 18 m tall in 1998), at
Longwood Gardens near Wilmington, Delaware, in the New Jersey State Botanical
Garden at Skylands in Ringwood State Park, Ringwood, New Jersey, and in the
Finger Lakes region of New York. Private plantings of giant sequoias around
the Middle Atlantic States are not uncommon, and other publicly accessible
specimens can be visited at the U.S. National Arboretum in Washington, D.C. A
few trees have been established in Colorado as well.[33] Additionally,
numerous sequoias have been planted with success in the state of Michigan.[34]

Sequoiadendron giganteum "Hazel Smith", photographed at the U.S. National
Arboretum in September, 2014.

A cold-tolerant cultivar 'Hazel Smith' selected in about 1960 is proving more
successful in the northeastern US. This clone was the sole survivor of several
hundred seedlings grown at a nursery in New Jersey. The U.S. National
Arboretum has a specimen grown from a cutting in 1970 that can be seen in the
Gotelli Conifer Collection.

### Australia[edit]

The Ballarat Botanical Gardens contain a significant collection, many of them
about 150 years old. Jubilee Park and the Hepburn Mineral Springs Reserve in
Daylesford, Cook Park in Orange, New South Wales and Carisbrook's Deep Creek
park in Victoria both have specimens. Jamieson Township in the Victorian high
country has 2 specimens which were planted in the early 1860s.[35] In Tasmania
specimens are to be seen in private and public gardens, as they were popular
in the mid Victorian era. The Westbury Village Green has mature specimens with
more in Deloraine. The Tasmanian Arboretum contains young wild collected
material. The National Arboretum Canberra has begun a grove. They also grow in
the abandoned arboretum at Mount Banda Banda in New South Wales.

### New Zealand[edit]

Sequoiadendron giganteum in Queenstown, New Zealand

Several impressive specimens of Sequoiadendron giganteum can be found in the
South Island of New Zealand. Notable examples include a set of trees in a
public park of Picton, as well as robust specimens in the public and botanical
parks of Christchurch and Queenstown.[citation needed] There are also several
in private gardens in Wanaka.[citation needed] There is also a tree at
Rangiora High School, which was planted for Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee
and is thus over 125 years old.[36]

## Superlatives[edit]

### Largest by trunk volume[edit]

Main article: List of largest giant sequoias

General Sherman, largest known living single stem tree in the world

Some sequoias, such as the Mother of the Forest, were undoubtedly far larger
than any living tree today.[citation needed] However, as of 2009, the top ten
largest giant sequoias sorted by volume of their trunks are:[6][note 1]

Rank  Tree Name  Grove  Height  Girth at ground  Volume  
(ft)  (m)  (ft)  (m)  (ft3)  (m3)  
1  General Sherman Giant Forest 274.9  83.8  102.6  31.3  52,508  1,486.9  
2[note 2] General Grant General Grant Grove 268.1  81.7  107.5  32.8  46,608
1,319.8[note 2]  
3[note 2] President Giant Forest 240.9  73.4  93.0  28.3  45,148  1,278.4[note
2]  
4  Lincoln Giant Forest 255.8  78.0  98.3  30.0  44,471  1,259.3  
5  Stagg Alder Creek Grove 243.0  74.1  109.0  33.2  42,557  1,205.1  
6  Boole Converse Basin 268.8  81.9  113.0  34.4  42,472  1,202.7  
7  Genesis Mountain Home Grove 253.0  77.1  85.3  26.0  41,897  1,186.4  
8  Franklin Giant Forest 223.8  68.2  94.8  28.9  41,280  1,168.9  
9  King Arthur Garfield Grove 270.3  82.4  104.2  31.8  40,656  1,151.2  
10  Monroe Giant Forest 247.8  75.5  91.3  27.8  40,104  1,135.6  
  
  * The General Sherman tree is estimated to weigh about 2100 tonnes.[39]
  * The Washington Tree was previously arguably the second largest tree with a volume of 47,850 cubic feet (1,355 m3) (although the upper half of its trunk was hollow, making the calculated volume debatable), but after losing the hollow upper half of its trunk in January 2005 following a fire, it is no longer of great size.

### Tallest[edit]

  * Redwood - Redwood Mountain Grove \- 95 metres (311 ft)[6]
  * tallest outside the United States:[22] specimen near Ribeauville, France, measured in 2014 at a height between 57.7 m (189 ft)[23] and 58.1 m (191 ft)[24] at age 158 years.

### Oldest[edit]

The Muir Snag, believed to be over 3500 years old

  * Muir Snag - Converse Basin Grove \- more than 3500 years[6]

### Greatest girth[edit]

  * Waterfall Tree - Alder Creek Grove \- 47 metres (155 ft) - tree with enormous basal buttress on very steep ground.[6]

### Greatest base diameter[edit]

  * Waterfall Tree - Alder Creek Grove \- 21 metres (69 ft) - tree with enormous basal buttress on very steep ground.[6]
  * Tunnel Tree - Atwell Mill Grove \- 17 metres (57 ft) - tree with a huge flared base that has burned all the way through.[6]

### Greatest mean diameter at breast height[edit]

  * General Grant \- General Grant Grove \- 8.8 metres (29.0 ft)[6]

### Largest limb[edit]

  * Arm Tree - Atwell Mill, East Fork Grove \- 3.9 metres (12.8 ft) in diameter[6]

### Thickest bark[edit]

  * 0.9 metres (3 ft) or more[6]

## See also[edit]

  * Mother of the Forest
  * General Sherman (tree)
  * The House (trees)
  * Bury Me in Redwood Country
  * List of giant sequoia groves
  * Sequoia National Park
  * Kings Canyon National Park
  * Yosemite National Park
  * Calaveras Big Trees State Park
  * Sequoioideae
  * Sequoia sempervirens \- Coast Redwood
  * Old growth forest
  * List of superlative trees

## Notes[edit]

  1. ^ The volume figures have a low degree of accuracy (at best about +-14 cubic metres or 490 cubic feet), due to difficulties in measurement; stem diameter measurements are taken at a few set heights up the trunk, and assume that the trunk is circular in cross-section, and that taper between measurement points is even. The volume measurements also do not take cavities into account. The measurements are trunk-only, and do not include the volume of wood in the branches or roots.
  2. ^ a b c d This table presents giant sequoias sorted by the volume of their trunks. In December 2012, Stephen Sillett announced a measurement of the President tree with a total of 54,000 cubic feet (1,500 m3) of wood and 9,000 cubic feet (250 m3) of wood in the branches.[37][38] Ranked according to the total amount of wood in the tree, the General Sherman tree is first, the President tree is second, and the General Grant tree is third.[37][38] General Sherman has 2,000 cubic feet (57 m3) more wood than the President tree.[37]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Schmid, R. & Farjon, A. 2013. Sequoiadendron giganteum. In: IUCN 2013. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2013.1. <www.iucnredlist.org>. Downloaded on 13 July 2013.
  2. ^ "Sequoia and Kings Canyon brochure" (PDF). National Park Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-10-26. Retrieved 2016-10-26.
  3. ^ a b Lowe, Gary D. (2012). "Endlicher's Sequence: The Naming of the Genus Sequoia" (PDF). cnps.org. California Native Plant Society. p. 27. Retrieved January 15, 2017. "Whitney states, 'The genus was named in honor of Sequoia* or Sequoyah, a Cherokee Indian.'"
  4. ^ a b Sierra Nevada - The Naturalist's Companion. University of California Press. 1 June 2000. p. 55\. ISBN 978-0-520-92549-6.
  5. ^ a b Lowe, Gary D. (2012). "Endlicher's Sequence: The Naming of the Genus Sequoia" (PDF). cnps.org. California Native Plant Society. p. 33. Retrieved January 15, 2017. "...the foregoing has shown that the name of the genus Sequoia as a tribute to the Cherokee linguist Sequoyah is an unsubstantiated opinion...Endlicher named the genus for the operation that he had conducted. The new genus fell in sequence with the other four genera in his suborder."
  6. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Flint 2002
  7. ^ Vaden, M.D. "Coast Redwood Discovery. Sequoia sempervirens".
  8. ^ water pull at Cropsview (an agriculture science magazine) website
  9. ^ Studies on tree height limits, and the Sequoia in particular
  10. ^ James E Eckenwalder. Conifers of the World, The Complete Reference. p 586. Timber Press 2009. ISBN 9780881929744
  11. ^ Bryan G Bowes. Trees and Forests, a colour guide. pp 48-49. Manson Publishing 2010. ISBN 9781840760859
  12. ^ Masters, Nathan (21 May 2014). "These Sequoia Trees Are Thriving 175 Miles South of Their Natural Range". Gizmodo. Retrieved April 15, 2018.
  13. ^ National Geographic Magazine December 2012
  14. ^ Hartesveldt, RJ; Harvey, HT (1967). "The Fire Ecology of Sequoia Regeneration" (PDF). Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference. 7: 7.
  15. ^ a b Farquhar, Francis P. (1925). "Discovery of the Sierra Nevada". California Historical Society Quarterly. 4 (1): 3-58. doi:10.2307/25177743. JSTOR 25177743. , Yosemite.ca.us
  16. ^ Ornduff, R. (1994). "A Botanist's View of the Big Tree". In Aune, P. S. Proceedings of the Symposium on Giant Sequoias (PDF). US Dept. of Agriculture Forest Service (Pacific Southwest Research Station). General Technical Report PSW-GTR-151.
  17. ^ Muir, John (November 1996). Gifford, Terry, ed. John Muir: His Life and Letters and Other Writings. Mountaineers Books. pp. 139-140. ISBN 0898864631.
  18. ^ "Battle against Rough fire intensifies as blaze bears down on Hume Lake". fresnobee. Retrieved 2015-10-18.
  19. ^ "Species Level Browse Results". NurseryGuide.com. Oregon Association of Nurseries. 2011. Archived from the original on 2012-03-09. Retrieved 2016-10-31.
  20. ^ "The History of Cluny - The Plant Collectors". clunyhousegardens.com. Retrieved 23 December 2008.
  21. ^ Christopher J. Earle. "Sequoiadendron giganteum (Lindley) Buchholz 1939". University of Hamburg. Archived from the original on 2012-07-07. Retrieved 23 December 2008.
  22. ^ a b "The thickest, tallest, and oldest giant sequoia trees (Sequoiadendron giganteum)". monumentaltrees.com. Retrieved August 2, 2015.
  23. ^ a b "Giant sequoia in the foret domaniale de Ribeauville". monumentaltrees.com. Retrieved August 2, 2015.
  24. ^ a b "RIQUEWIHR/RIBEAUVILLE (68) : Foret Domaniale de Ribeauville". Sequoias.eu. Retrieved August 2, 2015.
  25. ^ Tree Register of the British Isles, tree-register.org
  26. ^ "Top Trunks". Redwood World. Retrieved September 19, 2013.
  27. ^ "Sequoie d'Italia". Retrieved January 22, 2014.
  28. ^ Die Wiedereinfuhrung des Mammutbaumes (Sequoiadendron giganteum) in die deutsche Forstwirtschaft. In: Mitteilungen der Deutschen Dendrologischen Gesellschaft. Vol. 75. pp. 57-75. Ulmer. Stuttgart 1984, ISBN 3-8001-8308-0
  29. ^ Puzovic, B. (August 15, 2011). "Lazarevac: Visoke sekvoje nicu iz uglja" (in Serbian). Novosti.rs. Retrieved September 17, 2013.
  30. ^ "Mansion and History". Blithewold Mansion, Gardens, and Arboretum.
  31. ^ "Gardens". Blithewold Mansion, Gardens, and Arboretum.
  32. ^ Big Trees Of Pennsylvania: Sequoiadendron - Giant Sequoia, pabigtrees.com
  33. ^ "Colorado giant sequoia". giant-sequoia.com.
  34. ^ "Michigan giant sequoia". Giant-sequoia.com.
  35. ^ Jamieson & District Historical Society
  36. ^ "History". Rangiora High School.
  37. ^ a b c Cone, Tracie (2012-12-01). "Upon further review, giant sequoia tops a neighbor". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2012-12-02.
  38. ^ a b Quammen, David. "Giant Sequoias". National Geographic.
  39. ^ Fry & White 1938

## Sources[edit]

  * Conifer Specialist Group (1998). "Sequoiadendron giganteum". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2006. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 11 May 2006. Listed as Vulnerable (VU A1cd v2.3)
  * Aune, P. S., ed. (1994). Proceedings of the Symposium on Giant Sequoias. US Dept. of Agriculture Forest Service (Pacific Southwest Research Station). General Technical Report PSW-GTR-151.
  * Flint, W.D. (2002). To Find The Biggest Tree. Sequoia Natural History Association, Inc. ISBN 1-878441-09-4.
  * Mitchell, Alan (1972). Conifers in the British Isles. HMSO. Forestry Commission Booklet 33.
  * Mitchell, Alan (1996). Alan Mitchell's Trees of Britain. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-00-219972-6.
  * Harvey, H. T.; Shellhammer, H. S.; Stecker, R. E. (1980). Giant sequoia ecology. Scientific Monograph Series. 12. Washington, DC: U.S. National Park Service.
  * Kilgore, B. (1970). "Restoring Fire to the Sequoias". National Parks and Conservation Magazine. 44 (277): 16-22.
  * Zsolt Debreczy; Istvan Racz (2012). Kathy Musial, ed. Conifers Around the World (1st ed.). DendroPress. p. 1089\. ISBN 9632190610.

## Further reading[edit]

  * Chase, J. Smeaton (1911). Cone-bearing Trees of the California Mountains. Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co. p. 99\. LCCN 11004975. OCLC 3477527.
  * Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Sequoiadendron giganteum". The Gymnosperm Database.
  * Habeck, R. J. (1992). "Sequoiadendron giganteum". Fire Effects Information System (FEIS). US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service (USFS), Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory - via https://www.feis-crs.org/feis/.
  * Hartesveldt, Richard J.; Harvey, H. Thomas; Shellhammer, Howard S.; Stecker, Ronald E. (1975). The Giant Sequoia of the Sierra Nevada. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sequoiadendron giganteum.  
Wikispecies has information related to Sequoiadendron giganteum  
Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article Sequoia
Gigantea.  
  
  * ARKive: Sequoiadendron giganteum, arkive.org
  * Arboretum de Villardebelle - photos of cones & shoots with phenology notes, pinetum.org
  * Giant Sequoia Fire History in Mariposa Grove, Yosemite National Park, nps.gov
  * Save-the-Redwoods League, savethewoods.org
  * "Sequoias of Yosemite National Park" 1949 by James W. McFarland
  * Redwoodworld.co.uk giant redwoods in the U.K.
  * Scenes of Wonder and Curiosity in California (1862) - The Mammoth Trees Of Calaveras, yosemite.ca.us
  * Short radio episode Woody Gospel Letter in which John Muir extols "King Sequoia" from The Life and Letters of John Muir, 1924. California Legacy Project.
  * "Sequoia". Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.
  * Conifers Around the World: Sequoiadendron giganteum - Giant Sequoia.
  * Giants of Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Park, On YouTube by Sequoia Parks Conservancy
  * Video and commentary on the cones and bark characteristics on YouTube

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q149851
  * Wikispecies: Sequoiadendron giganteum
  * ARKive: sequoiadendron-giganteum
  * Calflora: 7532
  * CNPS: 2771
  * EoL: 323361
  * EPPO: SQUGI
  * FNA: 210002083
  * FoC: 210002083
  * GBIF: 2684120
  * GRIN: 33713
  * iNaturalist: 59567
  * IPNI: 677175-1
  * IRMNG: 10453639
  * ITIS: 183438
  * IUCN: 34023
  * NBN: NHMSYS0000463457
  * NCBI: 99814
  * NZOR: 2fea3225-7ec4-4801-8281-41c61f4d1a77
  * Plant List: kew-2587860
  * PLANTS: SEGI2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:234727-2
  * Tropicos: 31300229
  * WCSP: 381300

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sequoiadendron_giganteum&oldid=853827452"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List endangered species
  * Sequoiadendron
  * Endemic flora of California
  * Flora of the Sierra Nevada (U.S.)
  * Trees of the Southwestern United States
  * Trees of the United States
  * Symbols of California
  * Garden plants of North America
  * Ornamental trees
  * Endangered flora of California

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr)
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010
  * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018
  * Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012
  * Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????????
  * ?????????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Eesti
  * ????????
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Islenska
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * ???????
  * ????
  * ????? ????
  * Latina
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * ??????????
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Napulitano
  * Norsk
  * ????? ????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Scots
  * ?????
  * Slovencina
  * Slovenscina
  * ?????? / srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * West-Vlams
  * Winaray
  * ??
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 7 August 2018, at 05:40 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

