# Diselma

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Diselma archeri)

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Diselma  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Subfamily: Callitroideae  
Genus: Diselma  
Hook.f.  
Species:  D. archeri  
Binomial name  
Diselma archeri  
Hook.f.  
Synonyms  
  
Fitzroya archeri (Hook.f.) Benth. & Hook.  
  
Diselma archeri (dwarf pine or Cheshunt pine)[2] is a species of plant of the
family Cupressaceae and the sole species in the genus Diselma. It is endemic
to the alpine regions of Tasmania's southwest and Central Highlands, on the
western coast ranges and Lake St. Clair. It is a monotypic genus restricted to
high altitude rainforest and moist alpine heathland. Its distribution mirrors
very closely that of other endemic Tasmanian conifers Microcachrys tetragona
and Pherosphaera hookeriana.

## Contents

  * 1 Appearance and ecology
  * 2 Taxonomy
  * 3 Distribution
  * 4 Phylogeny
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

## Appearance and ecology[edit]

Scale-like leaves appear in a square in cross section and red coloration of
juvenile cone formation. Photo: R. Wiltshire

D. archeri cones

Diselma archeri is a compact, prostrate shrub which commonly reaches 1-4 m in
height but has been recorded to reach greater heights in subalpine rainforest
zones. The foliage has a grey-green appearance with branchlets curving
downward at their tips. Branches are short, ridged and very numerous.
Branchlet foliage appears square in cross-section and scale-like leaves (2-3
mm) are overlapping and arranged in opposite decussate pairs which are pressed
close to the stem.[3] The square leaf arrangement is similar to that of
Microcachrys tetragona (Podocarpaceae) (Creeping Pine) and the two species can
easily be confused. However, M. tetragona lives up to its name and grows low
to the ground, spreading out with only occasional erect branches. Another
species which can be confused with Diselma is Phaerosphaera hookeriana
(previously known as Microstrobos niphophilus ) which is also part of the
Podocarpaceae family. Both these species have a similar growth habit and
distribution, however, the opposite pairs of leaves on D. archeri again make
it distinguishable from the other species.[4] Bark is rough and scaly and
often weathered revealing a reddish-brown inner bark. Being a gymnosperm no
flowers are produced, instead seed development occurs on the surface of the
scale-like leaves which are modified to form cones (see image).[5]

Diselma archeri is a dioecious shrub, where male and female cones are located
on separate individuals. Both types of cones are very small (3-4 mm) and occur
at the branch tips. The female cone is composed of two pairs of opposite cone
scales and only the upper pair of scales is fertile.[6] At maturity up to four
small winged seeds are produced which are wind dispersed.[7] D. archeri
seedlings are uncommon as the species often re-sprouts from roots and trunks
buried in peat soils.[2]

## Taxonomy[edit]

Diselma : dis (meaning double) and selma (meaning upper) is a reference to
either the two fertile scales in the female cone or the arrangement of the
overlapping leaves in the opposite alternating pairs. archeri is named after
botanical collector William Archer (1820-1874) who was also a Fellow of the
Linnaean Society, an architect and Member of Parliament for Deloraine,
Tasmania.[8] This species is commonly known as dwarf pine in reference to its
prostrate growth pattern or Cheshunt pine which is in reference to a property
belonging to William Archer, although the species would not have occurred
there.[9]

Distribution map of Diselma archeri showing restriction to the South West and
Central Plateau of Tasmania

A simplified phylogeny derived from molecular analysis[10] showing the
phylogenetic relationship of Diselma to closely related genera in the
Cupressaceae. Diselma's closest relative appears to be the South American
genus Fitzroya.

## Distribution[edit]

Diselma archeri is endemic to Tasmania and is only found in high rainfall
alpine and subalpine areas of the South West and Central Plateau of the state.
Its altitudinal range varies from approximately 580-1400m above sea level.
Like many Tasmanian conifers D. archeri is very fire sensitive and will only
occur in fire free areas of alpine coniferous heath and montane
rainforest.[11] This species can form a small tree (3-4m) in closed rainforest
at high altitude and some ecologists consider Diselma to be one of the seven
genera which can be used as rainforest indicators in Tasmania.[12] In more
open coniferous heathland the Dwarf Pine grows more prostrate and only reaches
approximately 1-2m in height.

## Phylogeny[edit]

The closest relatives to Diselma appear to be the South American genus
Fitzroya, another monotypic genus in the subfamily Callitroideae, the Southern
Hemisphere clade of Cupressaceae.[10] Fossils of both Diselma and Fitzroya
have been recorded in Tasmania.[13] This evidence indicates that Diselma
archeri is most likely a paleoendemic and is the last remaining species in a
genus that was once more extensive and has refuged to specific alpine zones
due to changing climate.[14]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Diselma archeri". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42225A2962853. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42225A2962853.en. Retrieved 5 December 2017.
  2. ^ a b "Diselma archeri (Cupressaceae)". utas.edu.au. University of Tasmania. Retrieved 28 September 2014.
  3. ^ Kirkpatrick, J. 1997. Alpine Tasmania. An illustrated guide to the flora and vegetation. Oxford University Press" Melbourne. P. 18-19.
  4. ^ http://www.utas.edu.au/dicotkey/dicotkey/CONIFERS/sPhaerosphaera.htm
  5. ^ Raven, P.H., Evert, R.F., Eichorn, S.E. 2003. Biology of Plants. 6th Edition. W.H Freeman and Company
  6. ^ Armin Jagel, Veit Dorken: Morphology and morphogenesis of the seed cones of the Cupressaceae - part III. Callitroideae. Bulletin of the Cupressus Conservation Project, Bd. 4(3), 2015, S. 91-103 (PDF)
  7. ^ http://www.conifers.org/cu/Diselma.php
  8. ^ http://www.anbg.gov.au/gnp/gnp11/diselma-archeri.html
  9. ^ Wapstra, M., Wapstra, A., Wapstra, H. 2010. Tasmanian plant names unravelled. Fullers Bookshop Pty Ltd
  10. ^ a b Gadek, D.A., Alpers, D.L., Heslewood, M.M. and Quinn, C.J. 2000. Relationships within the Cupressaceae sensu lato: A combined morphological and molecular approach. American Journal of Botany 87(7): 1044-1057
  11. ^ http://www.utas.edu.au/dicotkey/dicotkey/CONIFERS/sDiselma.htm
  12. ^ Jarmen. S.J., Brown, M.J. 1983. A definition of cool temperate rainforest in Tasmania. Search14. P. 81-87
  13. ^ Jordan, G.J., Barnes, R. and Hill, R.S. 1995. An early to Middle Pleistocene Flora of subalpine affinities in lowland Western Tasmania. Australian Journal of Botany. 43. 231-242
  14. ^ Jordan, G.J., Barnes, R. and Hill, R.S. 1995. An early to Middle Pleistocene Flora of subalpine affinities in lowland Western Tasmania. Australian Journal of Botany. 43. 231-242

## External links[edit]

  * Gymnosperm Database: Diselma archeri

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q133228
  * Wikispecies: Diselma archeri
  * Conifers.org: Diselma
  * EoL: 1034876
  * EPPO: DSLAR
  * GBIF: 3611578
  * GRIN: 416631
  * iNaturalist: 136088
  * IPNI: 262058-1
  * IUCN: 42225
  * NCBI: 13497
  * Plant List: kew-2773001
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:262058-1
  * Tropicos: 9400704
  * WCSP: 385055

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diselma&oldid=842385147"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Cupressaceae
  * Monotypic conifer genera
  * Pinales of Australia
  * Least concern flora of Australia
  * Flora of Tasmania
  * Endemic flora of Tasmania

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ??????????
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Francais
  * ????
  * ????? ????
  * Nederlands
  * Norsk
  * ????? ????
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 22 May 2018, at 03:19 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

