# Sequoia sempervirens

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

"California Redwoods" redirects here. For the defunct UFL football team, see
Sacramento Mountain Lions.

Sequoia sempervirens  
Sequoia sempervirens along US 199  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Endangered (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Sequoia  
Species:  S. sempervirens  
Binomial name  
Sequoia sempervirens  
(D.Don) Endl.  
Natural range of California Sequoioideae subfamily

green - Sequoia sempervirens

red - Sequoiadendron giganteum  
  
Trunk in sectional view

Sequoia sempervirens - MHNT

Sequoia sempervirens /sI'k?I.? semp?r'vaIr?nz/[2] is the sole living species
of the genus Sequoia in the cypress family Cupressaceae (formerly treated in
Taxodiaceae). Common names include coast redwood, coastal redwood[3] and
California redwood.[4] It is an evergreen, long-lived, monoecious tree living
1,200-1,800 years or more.[5] This species includes the tallest living trees
on Earth, reaching up to 379 feet (115.5 m) in height (without the roots) and
up to 29.2 feet (8.9 m) in diameter at breast height (dbh). These trees are
also among the oldest living things on Earth. Before commercial logging and
clearing began by the 1850s, this massive tree occurred naturally in an
estimated 2,100,000 acres (8,500 km2)[citation needed] along much of coastal
California (excluding southern California where rainfall is not sufficient)
and the southwestern corner of coastal Oregon within the United States.

The name sequoia sometimes refers to the subfamily Sequoioideae, which
includes S. sempervirens along with Sequoiadendron (giant sequoia) and
Metasequoia (dawn redwood). Here, the term redwood on its own refers to the
species covered in this article, and not to the other two species.

## Contents

  * 1 Taxonomy
  * 2 Description
  * 3 Distribution and habitat
  * 4 Ecology
    * 4.1 Reproduction
  * 5 Cultivation and uses
  * 6 Statistics
    * 6.1 Tallest trees
    * 6.2 Other notable examples
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

## Taxonomy[edit]

Scottish botanist David Don described the redwood as the evergreen taxodium
(Taxodium sempervirens) in his colleague Aylmer Bourke Lambert's 1824 work A
description of the genus Pinus.[6] Austrian botanist Stephan Endlicher erected
the genus Sequoia in his 1847 work Synopsis coniferarum, giving the redwood
its current binomial name of Sequoia sempervirens.[7] Endlicher probably
derived the name Sequoia from the Cherokee name of George Gist, usually
spelled Sequoyah, who developed the still-used Cherokee syllabary.[8] The
redwood is one of three living species, each in its own genus, in the
subfamily Sequoioideae. Molecular studies have shown that the three are each
other's closest relatives, generally with the redwood and giant sequoia
(Sequoiadendron giganteum) as each other's closest relatives. However, Yang
and colleagues in 2010 queried the polyploid state of the redwood and
speculate that it may have arisen as an ancient hybrid between ancestors of
the giant sequoia and dawn redwood (Metasequoia). Using two different single
copy nuclear genes, LFY and NLY, to generate phylogenetic trees, they found
that Sequoia was clustered with Metasequoia in the tree generated using the
LFY gene, but with Sequoiadendron in the tree generated with the NLY gene.
Further analysis strongly supported the hypothesis that Sequoia was the result
of a hybridization event involving Metasequoia and Sequoiadendron. Thus, Yang
and colleagues hypothesize that the inconsistent relationships among
Metasequoia, Sequoia, and Sequoiadendron could be a sign of reticulate
evolution (in which two species hybridize and give rise to a third) among the
three genera. However, the long evolutionary history of the three genera (the
earliest fossil remains being from the Jurassic) make resolving the specifics
of when and how Sequoia originated once and for all a difficult
matter--especially since it in part depends on an incomplete fossil record.[9]

## Description[edit]

Bark detail

The coast redwood can reach 115 m (377 ft) tall with a trunk diameter of 9 m
(30 ft).[10] It has a conical crown, with horizontal to slightly drooping
branches. The bark can be very thick, up to 1-foot (30 cm), and quite soft and
fibrous, with a bright red-brown color when freshly exposed (hence the name
redwood), weathering darker. The root system is composed of shallow, wide-
spreading lateral roots.

The leaves are variable, being 15-25 mm (5/8-1 in) long and flat on young
trees and shaded shoots in the lower crown of old trees. On the other hand,
they are scale-like, 5-10 mm (1/4-3/8 in) long on shoots in full sun in the
upper crown of older trees, with a full range of transition between the two
extremes. They are dark green above and have two blue-white stomatal bands
below. Leaf arrangement is spiral, but the larger shade leaves are twisted at
the base to lie in a flat plane for maximum light capture.

The species is monoecious, with pollen and seed cones on the same plant. The
seed cones are ovoid, 15-32 mm (9/16-1 1/4 in) long, with 15-25 spirally
arranged scales; pollination is in late winter with maturation about 8-9
months after. Each cone scale bears three to seven seeds, each seed 3-4 mm
(1/8-3/16 in) long and 0.5 mm (0.02 in) broad, with two wings 1 mm (0.04 in)
wide. The seeds are released when the cone scales dry out and open at
maturity. The pollen cones are ovular and 4-6 mm (3/16-1/4 in) long.

Its genetic makeup is unusual among conifers, being a hexaploid (6n) and
possibly allopolyploid (AAAABB).[11] Both the mitochondrial and chloroplast
genomes of the redwood are paternally inherited.[12]

## Distribution and habitat[edit]

Sunlight shining through redwoods in Muir Woods

Fog is of major importance in coast redwood ecology. Redwood National Park

Coast redwoods occupy a narrow strip of land approximately 750 km (470 mi) in
length and 5-47 mi (8.0-75.6 km) in width along the Pacific coast of North
America; the most southerly grove is in Monterey County, California, and the
most northerly groves are in extreme southwestern Oregon. The prevailing
elevation range is 98-2,460 ft (30-750 m) above sea level, occasionally down
to 0 and up to 3,000 ft (about 920 m).[13] They usually grow in the mountains
where precipitation from the incoming moisture off the ocean is greater. The
tallest and oldest trees are found in deep valleys and gullies, where year-
round streams can flow, and fog drip is regular. The trees above the fog
layer, above about 2,296 ft (700 m), are shorter and smaller due to the drier,
windier, and colder conditions. In addition, Douglas fir, pine, and tanoak
often crowd out redwoods at these elevations. Few redwoods grow close to the
ocean, due to intense salt spray, sand, and wind. Coalescence of coastal fog
accounts for a considerable part of the trees' water needs.[14]

The northern boundary of its range is marked by groves on the Chetco River on
the western fringe of the Klamath Mountains, near the California-Oregon
border. The largest (and tallest) populations are in Redwood National and
State Parks (Del Norte and Humboldt Counties) and Humboldt Redwoods State Park
(Humboldt County, California), with the majority located in the much larger
Humboldt County. The southern boundary of its range is the Los Padres National
Forest's Silver Peak Wilderness in the Santa Lucia Mountains of the Big Sur
area of Monterey County, California. The southernmost grove is in the Southern
Redwood Botanical Area, just north of the national forest's Salmon Creek
trailhead.[15] The southernmost grove can be seen from California Highway 1 at
the approximate coordinates 35?49'42 N 121?23'14 W.

The prehistoric fossil range of the genus is considerably greater, with a
subcosmopolitan distribution including Europe and Asia until about 5 million
years ago. During the last ice age, perhaps as recently as 10,000 years ago,
redwood trees grew as far south as the Los Angeles area (coast redwood bark
found in subway excavations and at La Brea tar pits).

## Ecology[edit]

This native area provides a unique environment with heavy seasonal rains up to
100 inches (2,500 mm) annually. Cool coastal air and fog drip keep this forest
consistently damp year round. Several factors, including the heavy rainfall,
create a soil with fewer nutrients than the trees need, causing them to depend
heavily on the entire biotic community of the forest, especially complete
recycling of the trees when dead. This forest community includes coast Douglas
fir, Pacific madrone, tanoak, western hemlock, and other trees, along with a
wide variety of ferns, mosses, mushrooms, and redwood sorrel. Redwood forests
provide habitat for a variety of amphibians, bird, mammals, and reptiles. Old-
growth redwood stands provide habitat for the federally threatened spotted owl
and the California-endangered marbled murrelet.

Coast redwoods are resistant to insect attack, fungal infection, and rot.
These properties are conferred by concentrations of terpenoids and tannic acid
in redwood leaves, roots, bark, and wood.[16] Despite these chemical defenses,
redwoods are still subject to insect infestations; none, however, are capable
of killing a healthy tree.[16] Redwoods also face predation from mammals:
black bears are reported to consume the inner bark of small redwoods, and
black-tailed deer are known to eat redwood sprouts.[16]

The oldest known coast redwood is about 2,200 years old;[17] many others in
the wild exceed 600 years. The numerous claims of older redwoods are
incorrect.[17] Because of their seemingly timeless lifespans, coast redwoods
were deemed the "everlasting redwood" at the turn of the century; in Latin,
sempervirens means "ever green" or "everlasting". Redwoods must endure various
environmental disturbances to attain such great ages. In response to forest
fires, the trees have developed various adaptations. The thick, fibrous bark
of coast redwoods is extremely fire-resistant; it grows to at least a foot
thick and protects mature trees from fire damage.[18][19] In addition, the
redwoods contain little flammable pitch or resin.[19] If damaged by fire, a
redwood readily sprouts new branches or even an entirely new crown,[18][16]
and if the parent tree is killed, new buds sprout from its base.[16] Fires,
moreover, appear to actually benefit redwoods by causing substantial mortality
in competing species while having only minor effects on redwood. Burned areas
are favorable to the successful germination of redwood seeds.[18] A study
published in 2010, the first to compare post-wildfire survival and
regeneration of redwood and associated species, concluded fires of all
severity increase the relative abundance of redwood and higher-severity fires
provide the greatest benefit.[20]

Redwoods often grow in flood-prone areas. Sediment deposits can form
impermeable barriers that suffocate tree roots, and unstable soil in flooded
areas often causes trees to lean to one side, increasing the risk of the wind
toppling them. Immediately after a flood, redwoods grow their existing roots
upwards into recently deposited sediment layers.[21] A second root system then
develops from adventitious buds on the newly buried trunk and the old root
system dies.[21] To counter lean, redwoods increase wood production on the
vulnerable side, creating a supporting buttress.[21] These adaptations create
forests of almost exclusively redwood trees in flood-prone regions.[16][21]

The height of S. sempervirens is closely tied to fog availability; taller
trees become less frequent as fog becomes less frequent.[22] As S.
sempervirens' height increases, transporting water via water potential to the
leaves becomes increasingly difficult due to gravity.[23][24][25] Despite the
high rainfall that the region receives (up to 100 cm), the leaves in the upper
canopy are perpetually stressed for water.[26][27] This water stress is
exacerbated by long droughts in the summer.[28] Water stress is believed to
cause the morphological changes in the leaves, stimulating reduced leaf length
and increased leaf succulence.[24][29] To supplement their water needs,
redwoods utilize frequent summer fog events. Fog water is absorbed through
multiple pathways. Leaves directly take in fog from the surrounding air
through the epidermal tissue, bypassing the xylem.[30][31] Coast redwoods also
absorb water directly through their bark.[32] The uptake of water through
leaves and bark repairs and reduces the severity of xylem embolisms,[33][32]
which occur when cavitations form in the xylem preventing the transport of
water and nutrients.[32] Fog may also collect on redwood leaves, drip to the
forest floor, and be absorbed by the tree's roots. This fog drip may form 30%
of the total water used by a tree in a year.[28]

### Reproduction[edit]

A ring of redwoods as seen from below

Coast redwood reproduces both sexually by seed and asexually by sprouting of
buds, layering, or lignotubers. Seed production begins at 10-15 years of age.
Cones develop in the winter and mature by fall. In the early stages, the cones
look like flowers, and are commonly called "flowers" by professional
foresters, although this is not strictly correct. Coast redwoods produce many
cones, with redwoods in new forests producing thousands per year.[18] The
cones themselves hold 90-150 seeds, but viability of seed is low, typically
well below 15% with one estimate of average rates being 3 to 10
percent.[34][18] The low viability may discourage seed predators, which do not
want to waste time sorting chaff (empty seeds) from edible seeds. Successful
germination often requires a fire or flood, reducing competition for
seedlings. The winged seeds are small and light, weighing 3.3-5.0 mg (200-300
seeds/g; 5,600-8,500/ounce). The wings are not effective for wide dispersal,
and seeds are dispersed by wind an average of only 60-120 m (200-390 ft) from
the parent tree. Seedlings are susceptible to fungal infection and predation
by banana slugs, bush rabbits, and nematodes.[16] Most seedlings do not
survive their first three years.[18] However, those that become established
grow very fast, with young trees known to reach 20 m (66 ft) tall in 20 years.

Coast redwoods can also reproduce asexually by layering or sprouting from the
root crown, stump, or even fallen branches; if a tree falls over, it generates
a row of new trees along the trunk, so many trees naturally grow in a straight
line. Sprouts originate from dormant or adventitious buds at or under the
surface of the bark. The dormant sprouts are stimulated when the main adult
stem gets damaged or starts to die. Many sprouts spontaneously erupt and
develop around the circumference of the tree trunk. Within a short period
after sprouting, each sprout develops its own root system, with the dominant
sprouts forming a ring of trees around the parent root crown or stump. This
ring of trees is called a "fairy ring". Sprouts can achieve heights of 2.3 m
(7.5 ft) in a single growing season.

Redwoods may also reproduce using burls. A burl is a woody lignotuber that
commonly appears on a redwood tree below the soil line, though usually within
3 metres (10 ft) in depth from the soil surface. Coast redwoods develop burls
as seedlings from the axils of their cotyledon, a trait that is extremely rare
in conifers.[18] When provoked by damage, dormant buds in the burls sprout new
shoots and roots. Burls are also capable of sprouting into new trees when
detached from the parent tree, though exactly how this happens is yet to be
studied. Shoot clones commonly sprout from burls and are often turned into
decorative hedges when found in suburbia.

## Cultivation and uses[edit]

An example of a bonsai redwood, from the Pacific Bonsai Museum

The Skyline-to-the-Sea Trail passing through a fallen California redwood tree

Coast redwood is one of the most valuable timber species in the lumbering
industry. In California, 899,000 acres (3,640 km2) of redwood forest are
logged, virtually all of it second growth.[35] Though many entities have
existed in the cutting and management of redwoods, perhaps none has had a more
storied role than the Pacific Lumber Company (1863-2008) of Humboldt County,
California, where it owned and managed over 200,000 acres (810 km2) of
forests, primarily redwood. Coast redwood lumber is highly valued for its
beauty, light weight, and resistance to decay. Its lack of resin makes it
resistant to fire.

P.H. Shaughnessy, Chief Engineer of the San Francisco Fire Department wrote,

> In the recent great fire of San Francisco, that began April 18th, 1906, we
succeeded in finally stopping it in nearly all directions where the unburned
buildings were almost entirely of frame construction, and if the exterior
finish of these buildings had not been of redwood lumber, I am satisfied that
the area of the burned district would have been greatly extended.

Because of its impressive resistance to decay, redwood was extensively used
for railroad ties and trestles throughout California. Many of the old ties
have been recycled for use in gardens as borders, steps, house beams, etc.
Redwood burls are used in the production of table tops, veneers, and turned
goods.

The Yurok people, who occupied the region before European settlement,
regularly burned off ground cover in redwood forests to bolster tanoak
populations from which they harvested acorns, to maintain forest openings, and
to boost populations of useful plant species such as those for medicine or
basketmaking.[16]

Extensive logging of redwoods began in the early nineteenth century. The trees
were felled by ax and saw onto beds of tree limbs and shrubs to cushion their
fall.[16] Stripped of their bark, the logs were transported to mills or
waterways by oxen or horse.[16] Loggers then burned the accumulated tree
limbs, shrubs, and bark. The repeated fires favored secondary forests of
primarily redwoods as redwood seedlings sprout readily in burned
areas.[16][36] The introduction of steam engines let crews drag logs through
long skid trails to nearby railroads,[16] furthering the reach of loggers
beyond the land nearby rivers previously used to transport trees.[36] This
method of harvesting, however, disturbed large amounts of soil, producing
secondary-growth forests of species other than redwood such as Douglas-fir,
grand fir, and western hemlock.[16] After World War II, trucks and tractors
gradually replaced steam engines, giving rise to two harvesting approaches:
clearcutting and selection harvesting. Clearcutting involved felling all the
trees in a particular area. It was encouraged by tax laws that exempted all
standing timber from taxation if 70% of trees in the area were harvested.[16]
Selection logging, by contrast, called for the removal 25% to 50% of mature
trees in the hopes that the remaining trees would allow for future growth and
reseeding.[36] This method, however, encouraged growth of other tree species,
converting redwood forests into mixed forests of redwood, grand fir, Sitka
spruce, and western hemlock.[36][16] Moreover, the trees left standing were
often felled by windthrow; that is, they were often blown over by the wind.

The coast redwood is naturalized in New Zealand, notably at Whakarewarewa
Forest, Rotorua.[37] Redwood has been grown in New Zealand plantations for
over 100 years, and those planted in New Zealand have higher growth rates than
those in California, mainly due to even rainfall distribution through the
year.[38] Other areas of successful cultivation outside of the native range
include Great Britain, Italy, Portugal,[39] Haida Gwaii, middle elevations of
Hawaii, Hogsback in South Africa, a small area in central Mexico (Jilotepec),
and the southeastern United States from eastern Texas to Maryland. It also
does well in the Pacific Northwest (Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia),
far north of its northernmost native range in southwestern Oregon. Coast
redwood trees were used in a display at Rockefeller Center and then given to
Longhouse Reserve in East Hampton, Long Island, New York, and these have now
been living there for over twenty years and have survived at 2 ?F (-17
?C).[40]

This fast-growing tree can be grown as an ornamental specimen in those large
parks and gardens that can accommodate its massive size. It has gained the
Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.[41]

## Statistics[edit]

Dried resin of a redwood tree

The foliage of an "albino" Sequoia sempervirens exhibiting lack of chlorophyll

Trees over 200 feet (60 m) are common, and many are over 300 ft (90 m). The
current tallest tree is the Hyperion tree, measuring 379.3 ft (115.61 m).[17]
The tree was discovered in Redwood National Park during the summer of 2006 by
Chris Atkins and Mchael Taylor, and is thought to be the world's tallest
living organism. The previous record holder was the Stratosphere Giant in
Humboldt Redwoods State Park at 370.2 ft (112.84 m) (as measured in 2004).
Until it fell in March 1991, the "Dyerville Giant" was the record holder. It,
too, stood in Humboldt Redwoods State Park and was 372 ft (113.4 m) high and
estimated to be 1,600 years old. This fallen giant has been preserved in the
park.

As of 2016, no living specimen of other tree species exceeds 100 m (328.1 ft).
Numerous historic reports exist of Redwood trees 350 to 400 feet high, a tree
reportedly 375 feet (114.3 m) in length was felled in Sonoma County by the
Murphy Brothers saw mill in the 1870s[42] another claimed to be 380 ft (115.8
m) was cut down in 1914,[43] and one tree was even reported to be 424 ft
(129.2 m) was felled in November 1886 by the Elk River Mill and Lumber Co. in
Humboldt County, yielding 79,736 marketable board feet from 21
cuts.[44][45][46] However, these accounts and many others must be viewed with
some skepticism as limited evidence corroborates the measurements, and
exaggerated claims were not uncommon in the lumber industry.

Fairly solid evidence indicates that coast redwoods were the world's largest
trees before logging, with numerous historical specimens reportedly over 400
ft (122 m).[47] The theoretical maximum potential height of coast redwoods is
thought to be limited to between 400 and 425 ft (121.9 and 129.5 m), as
evapotranspiration is insufficient to transport water to leaves beyond this
range.[23] Further studies have indicated this cap is eased by fog, which is
prevalent in these trees' natural environment.[48]

The largest known living coast redwood is Grogan's Fault, discovered in 2014
by Chris Atkins and Mario Vaden in Redwood National Park,[17] with a main
trunk volume of at least 38,299 cubic feet (1,084.5 m3).[17] Other high-volume
coast redwoods include Iluvatar, with a main trunk volume of 36,470 cubic feet
(1,033 m3),[47]:160 and the Lost Monarch, with a main trunk volume of 34,914
cu ft (988.7 m3).[49]

About 230 albino redwoods (mutant individuals that cannot manufacture
chlorophyll) are known to exist,[50] reaching heights of up to 20 m (66
ft).[51] These trees survive as parasites, obtaining food by grafting their
root systems with those of normal trees. While similar mutations occur
sporadically in other conifers, no cases are known of such individuals
surviving to maturity in any other conifer species.[citation needed] Recent
research news reports that albino redwoods can store higher concentrations of
toxic metals, going so far as comparing them to organs or "waste
dumps".[52][53]

### Tallest trees[edit]

Redwood with a large burl in Humboldt Redwoods State Park

Heights of the tallest coast redwoods are measured yearly by experts.[17] Even
with recent discoveries of tall coast redwoods above 100 metres (330 ft), it
is likely that no taller trees will be discovered.[17]

Ten tallest Sequoia sempervirens[17] Rank  Name  Height  Diameter  Location  
Meters  Feet  Meters  Feet  
1  Hyperion 115.85  380.1  4.84  15.9  Redwood National and State Parks (RNP)  
2  Helios  114.58  375.9  4.96  16.3  RNP  
3  Icarus  113.14  371.2  3.78  12.4  RNP  
4  Stratosphere Giant 113.05  370.9  5.18  17.0  Humboldt Redwoods State Park
(HRSP)  
5  National Geographic  112.71  369.8  4.39  14.4  HRSP  
6  Orion  112.63  369.5  4.33  14.2  RNP  
7  Federation Giant  112.62  369.5  4.54  14.9  HRSP  
8  Paradox  112.51  369.1  3.90  12.8  HRSP  
9  Mendocino  112.32  368.5  4.19  13.7  Montgomery Woods State Natural
Reserve  
10  Millenium  111.92  367.2  2.71  8.9  HRSP  
  
Diameter stated is as measured at 1.4 m (about 4.5 ft) above average ground
level (at breast height). Details of the precise locations for most tallest
trees were not announced to the general public for fear of causing damage to
the trees and the surrounding habitat.[17] The tallest coast redwood easily
accessible to the public is the Founders Tree in Humboldt Redwoods State Park,
standing over 346 ft tall. A taller coast redwood is also accessible to the
public in Tall Trees Grove of Redwood National Park.[citation needed]

### Other notable examples[edit]

  * The Navigation (or Blossom Rock) trees were two especially tall sequoias located in the Oakland Hills used as a navigation aid by sailors to avoid the treacherous Blossom Rock near Yerba Buena Island.[54]
  * One of the largest redwood stumps ever found (31 ft. diameter) is in the Oakland Hills in the Roberts Regional Recreation Area section of Redwood Regional Park. Only a single old-growth redwood (the Grandfather) remains from the original forest.[55][56][57]
  * Crannell Creek Giant was documented to have at least 61,500 cu ft trunk volume - about 17% larger than the current biggest tree. It was felled around 1945.[17]

## See also[edit]

  * Lindsey Creek tree
  * Bury Me in Redwood Country
  * Save-the-Redwoods League
  * Redwood National and State Parks
  * Humboldt Redwoods State Park
  * Los Padres National Forest
  * Northern California coastal forests (WWF ecoregion)
  * Pacific temperate rain forest (WWF ecoregion)
  * Redwood (color)
  * Sequoioideae
  * Sequoiadendron giganteum \- Giant Sequoia
  * Old-growth forest
  * List of superlative trees

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. & Schmid, R. (2013). "Sequoia sempervirens". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T34051A2841558. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T34051A2841558.en. Retrieved 16 January 2018.
  2. ^ Sunset Western Garden Book, 1995:606-607  
"sempervirent". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.
September 2005. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)

  3. ^ "BSBI List 2007". Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-01-25. Retrieved 2014-10-17.
  4. ^ The related Sequoiadendron giganteum is commonly referred to as "giant redwood".
  5. ^ "Sequoia gigantea is of an ancient and distinguished family". Nps.gov. 2007-02-02. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
  6. ^ Don, David (1824). Lambert, Aylmer Bourke, ed. A description of the genus Pinus :illustrated with figures, directions relative to the cultivation, and remarks on the uses of the several species. 2. London, United Kingdom: J. White. p. 24.
  7. ^ Endlicher, Stephan (1847). Synopsis Coniferarum. St. Gallen: Scheitlin & Zollikofer.
  8. ^ Muleady-Mecham, Nancy E (2017). "Bulletin of the Southern California Academy of Science". 116: 137-146.
  9. ^ Yang, Z.Y.; Ran, J.H.; Wang, X.Q. (2012). "Three Genome-based Phylogeny of Cupressaceae s.l: Further Evidence for the Evolution of Gymnosperms and Southern Hemisphere Biogeography". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 64: 452-470. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2012.05.004. PMID 22609823.
  10. ^ Watson, Frank D. (1993). "Sequoia sempervirens". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford. Retrieved 1 February 2015 - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  11. ^ Ahuja, MR; Neale, DB (2002). "Origins of Polyploidy in Coast Redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) and Relationship of Coast Redwood to other Genera of Taxodiaceae". Silvae Genetica. 51 (2-3): 93-100.
  12. ^ Neale, DB; Marshall, KA; Sederoff, RR (1989). "Chloroplast and Mitochondrial DNA are Paternally Inherited in Sequoia sempervirens". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 86 (23): 9347-9. Bibcode:1989PNAS...86.9347N. doi:10.1073/pnas.86.23.9347. PMC 298492 . PMID 16594091.
  13. ^ Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4.
  14. ^ "Redwood fog drip". Bio.net. 1998-12-02. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
  15. ^ "Los Padres National Forest". Redwoodhikes.com. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
  16. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Noss, Reed (2000). The Redwood Forest: History, Ecology, and Conservation of the Coast Redwoods. Island Press. ISBN 1559637269. OCLC 925183647.
  17. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Sequoia sempervirens". The Gymnosperm Database. Retrieved 2017-12-30.
  18. ^ a b c d e f g 1922-, Becking, Rudolf Willem, (1982-01-01). Pocket flora of the redwood forest. Island Press. ISBN 0933280025. OCLC 904189212.
  19. ^ a b Shirely, James Clifford. 1940. The Redwoods of Coast and Sierra. University of California Press.
  20. ^ Ramage, B.S.; O'Hara, K.L.; Caldwell, B.T. (2010). "The role of fire in the competitive dynamics of coast redwood forests". Ecosphere. 1 (6). article 20. doi:10.1890/ES10-00134.1.
  21. ^ a b c d Stone, Edward C.; Vasey, Richard B. (January 12, 1968). "Preservation of Coast Redwoods on Alluvial Flats". Science. 159 (3811): 157-161. Bibcode:1968Sci...159..157S. doi:10.1126/science.159.3811.157.
  22. ^ Harris, S. A. (1989). "Relationship of convection fog to characteristics of the vegetation of Redwood National Park". MSc Thesis.
  23. ^ a b Koch, G.W.; Sillett, S.C.; Jennings, G.M.; Davis, S.D. (2004). "The limits to tree height". Nature. 428: 851-854. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..851K. doi:10.1038/nature02417. PMID 15103376.
  24. ^ a b Ishii, H. T.; Jennings, Gregory M.; Sillett, Stephen C.; Koch, George W. (July 2008). "Hydrostatic constraints on morphological exploitation of light in tall Sequoia sempervirens trees". Oecologia. 156 (4): 751-63. Bibcode:2008Oecol.156..751I. doi:10.1007/s00442-008-1032-z. PMID 18392856.
  25. ^ Sperry, J. S.; Meinzer; McCulloh (May 2008). "Safety and efficiency conflicts in hydraulic architecture: scaling from tissues to trees. Plant". Plant, Cell, and Environment.
  26. ^ Mullen, L. P.; Sillett, S. C.; Koch, G. W.; Antonie, K. P.; Antoine, M. E. (May 29, 2009). "Physiological consequences of height-related morphological variation in Sequoia sempervirens foliage" (PDF). Tree Physiology. 29 (8): 999-1010. doi:10.1093/treephys/tpp037. PMID 19483187. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 9, 2012.
  27. ^ Ishii, H. T.; Azuma, Wakana; Kuroda, Keiko; Sillett, Stephen C. (May 26, 2014). "Pushing the limits to tree height: Could foliar water storage compensate for hydraulic constraints in sequoia sempervirens?". Functional Ecology. 28 (5): 1087-1093. doi:10.1111/1365-2435.12284.
  28. ^ a b Burgess, S. S. O.; Dawson, T. E. (2004). "The contribution of fog to the water relations of Sequoia sempervirens (D. Don): foliar uptake and prevention of dehydration". Plant, Cell and Environment. 27: 1023-1034. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3040.2004.01207.x.
  29. ^ Oldham, A. R.; Sillett, S. C.; Tomescu, A. M. F.; Koch, G. W. (July 2010). "The hydrostatic gradient, not light availability drives height-related variation in Sequoia sempervirens (Cupressaceae) leaf anatomy". American Journal of Botany. 97 (7): 1087-97. doi:10.3732/ajb.0900214. PMID 21616861.
  30. ^ Dawson, T. E. (1 September 1998). "Fog in the California redwood forest: Ecosystem inputs and used by plants" (PDF). Oecologia. 117: 476-485. Bibcode:1998Oecol.117..476D. doi:10.1007/s004420050683.
  31. ^ Simonin, K. A.; Santiago, Louis S.; Dawson, Todd E. (July 2009). "Fog interception by Sequoia sempervirens (D. Don) crowns decouples physiology from soil water deficit". Plant, Cell and Environment. 32 (7): 882-892. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3040.2009.01967.x.
  32. ^ a b c Earles, J. M.; Sperling, O.; Silva, L. C. R.; McElrone, A. J.; Brodersen, C. R.; North, M. P.; Zwieniecki, M. A. (2015). "Bark water uptake promotes localized hydraulic recovery in coastal redwood crown". Plant, Cell & Environment. 39: 320-328. doi:10.1111/pce.12612.
  33. ^ Tognetti, R. A.; Longobucco, Anna; Rashi, Antonio; Jones, Mike B. (2001). "Stem hydraulic properties and xylem vulnerability to embolism in three co-occurring Mediterranean shrubs at a natural CO2 spring". Australian Journal of Plant Physiology. 28 (4): 257. doi:10.1071/PP00125.
  34. ^ "Botanical Garden Logistics" (PDF). UC Berkeley - Biology 1B - Plants & Their Environments (p. 13). Berkeley, California: Department of Integrative Biology, University of California-Berkeley. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-13. Retrieved 2014-01-02.
  35. ^ "IUCN Red List of Threatened Species". Species Survival Commission. Retrieved 2011-08-14.
  36. ^ a b c d Lowell, Phillip G. (1990). A Review of Redwood Harvesting: Another Look -- 1990. California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
  37. ^ "Kia Ora - Welcome to The Redwoods Whakarewarewa Forest". Rotorua District Council. Retrieved November 10, 2011.
  38. ^ "Redwood History". The New Zealand Redwood Company. Retrieved November 11, 2017.
  39. ^ "Distribution within Europe". Retrieved 2011-08-14.
  40. ^ "Longhouse". Retrieved 2011-08-14.
  41. ^ "RHS Plant Selector Sequoia sempervirens AGM / RHS Gardening". Apps.rhs.org.uk. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
  42. ^ Scientific American: Supplement. Munn and Company. 1877-01-01.
  43. ^ Carder, A (1995). Forest giants of the world: past and present. Ontario: Fitzhenry and Whiteside. ISBN 978-1-55041-090-7.
  44. ^ Redwood Lumber Industry, Lynwood Carranco. Golden West Books, 1982 - Page 21.
  45. ^ "Fort Worth Daily Gazette, Fort Worth, Texas. December 9th, 1886 - Page 2". Chroniclingamerica.loc.gov. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
  46. ^ "Does size matter? John Driscoll/The Times-Standard, Eureka, California. September 8th, 2006". Times-standard.com. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
  47. ^ a b Van Pelt, Robert (2001). Forest Giants of the Pacific Coast. Global Forest Society and University of Washington Press. pp. 16, 42. ISBN 0-295-98140-7.
  48. ^ "Climate explains why West Coast trees are much taller than those in the East". Retrieved 2015-03-10.
  49. ^ Wendell D. Flint (1 January 2002). To Find the Biggest Tree. Sequoia Natural History Association. ISBN 978-1-878441-09-6.
  50. ^ "Cotati residents, scientists scramble to save albino redwood". SFGate.
  51. ^ Stienstra, T (2007-10-11). "It's no snow job: handful of redwoods are rare albinos". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 2011-08-14.
  52. ^ "Ghost Redwoods: Solving the Albino Redwoods Mystery".
  53. ^ "Mystery Of White Trees Among California's Redwoods May Be Solved".
  54. ^ "Alameda". California State Parks Office of Historic Preservation.
  55. ^ Herron Zamora, Jim (August 14, 2006). "The 'Grandfather' of Oakland's redwoods". San Francisco Chronicle.
  56. ^ Fimrite, Peter (May 8, 2013). "Hidden Redwood is Remnant of Forest Giants". San Francisco Chronicle.
  57. ^ Slack, Gordy (July 1, 2004). "In the Shadow of Giants". BayNature.

## Further reading[edit]

  * * Noss, R. F., ed. (2000). The Redwood Forest: history, ecology and conservation of the Coast Redwood. Island Press, Washington, D.C. ISBN 1-55963-726-9.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sequoia sempervirens.  
Wikispecies has information related to Sequoia sempervirens  
Wikisource has the text of a 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article about Sequoia
sempervirens.  
  
  * Institute for Redwood Ecology Includes photo gallery, canopy views, epiphytes, and arboreal animals
  * Gymnosperm Database
  * US National Park Service Redwood
  * Muir Woods National Monument
  * Save the Redwoods League Non-profit organization: education, protection and restoration
  * Sempervirens Fund Non-profit organization
  * ICT Int. Gallery sensors installation by Dr. Stephen Sillett & team
  * Coast Redwoods - Largest & Tallest Photos for largest and tallest Coast Redwoods and other information.
  * Bury Me in Redwood Country Documentary film about coast redwoods
  * "Science on the SPOT: Albino redwoods, ghosts of the forest". YouTube video from Quest. KQED. 2010-08-26. Retrieved 2011-08-14.
  * Redwood Timelapse California Redwoods, YouTube. This is a short film about the Coastal Redwoods of California.
  * One Man's Mission to Revive the Last Redwood Forests | Short Film Showcase, On YouTube by National Geographic. Published on 28 May 2016;
  * "Redwood Forests - Lumber Felling & Milling 1940's". YouTube video from Historia - Bel99TV. 2013-02-02. Retrieved 2014-11-17.
  * Humboldt Redwoods State Park (CA) Humboldt Redwoods Interpretive Association
  * Preston, Richard. "Climbing the Redwoods" \- 2/14-21/2005 New Yorker article about redwoods and climbing.
  * More about Sequoia sempervirens:
  * Popular Science, November 1943, Saga of the Redwoods

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Sequoia sempervirens

  * Wikidata: Q150129
  * Wikispecies: Sequoia sempervirens
  * ARKive: sequoia-sempervirens
  * Calflora: 7531
  * EoL: 1034849
  * EPPO: SEQSE
  * FloraBase: 17808
  * FNA: 200005399
  * FoC: 200005399
  * GBIF: 2683909
  * GRIN: 33710
  * iNaturalist: 47372
  * IPNI: 263741-1
  * IRMNG: 11325771
  * ITIS: 183435
  * IUCN: 34051
  * NBN: NHMSYS0000463454
  * NCBI: 28980
  * NZOR: 280c5830-f56e-4682-888e-8bff3e3c803e
  * PfaF: Sequoia sempervirens
  * Plant List: kew-2484394
  * PLANTS: SESE3
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:263741-1
  * Tropicos: 31300228
  * WCSP: 378988

  
  
Taxodium sempervirens

  * Wikidata: Q17363914
  * GBIF: 2683910
  * GRIN: 80069
  * IPNI: 263779-1
  * IRMNG: 10515526
  * ITIS: 183436
  * Tropicos: 31300025

  
  
Authority control

  * NDL: 00570635

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sequoia_sempervirens&oldid=855024803"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List endangered species
  * Sequoia (genus)
  * Endemic flora of the United States
  * Flora of California
  * Flora of Oregon
  * Trees of the West Coast of the United States
  * Natural history of the California Coast Ranges
  * Natural history of Del Norte County, California
  * Natural history of Humboldt County, California
  * Pacific temperate rainforests ecoregion
  * Living fossils
  * Extant Miocene first appearances
  * Miocene California
  * Miocene plants
  * Neogene life of North America
  * Redwood National and State Parks
  * Symbols of California
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Trees of the Northwestern United States
  * Trees of the Southwestern United States
  * Endangered flora of California
  * Garden plants of North America
  * Ornamental trees

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * CS1: Julian-Gregorian uncertainty
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018
  * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016
  * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms
  * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * ???????
  * Asturianu
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????????
  * ?????????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Eesti
  * ????????
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Islenska
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * ???????
  * ????
  * ????? ????
  * Latviesu
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * ??????????
  * Nahuatl
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * ??????
  * ????? ????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Ripoarisch
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Scots
  * Slovencina
  * Slovenscina
  * Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ?????
  * Turkce
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Walon
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 15 August 2018, at 12:09 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

