# Callitris baileyi

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Callitris baileyi  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Near Threatened (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Callitris  
Species:  C. baileyi  
Binomial name  
Callitris baileyi  
C.White  
  
Callitris baileyi is a species of conifer in the family Cupressaceae. It is
found only in Australia, more specifically Southeast Queensland.[1] It's
common English name is Bailey's cypress-pine. The name is dedicated to
Australian botanist Frederick Manson Bailey, whom was the first to collect
specimens of this tree. Bailey's name is closely associated with much of the
flora of Queensland and their elucidation in Southeastern Queensland.[2] Over
the past few decades the conifer has been severely threatened by habitat loss
Fruiting for the species has been recorded year-round.[3]

Frederick Manson Bailey : First individual to collect Callitris baileyi

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Range and habitat
  * 3 Habitat decline and conservation
  * 4 References

## Description[edit]

Callitris baileyi is a slender tree growing to a height of 18m with rough
greyish looking bark, and with a green crown.[3] The adult leaves are green
with an average size of 25 mm long.[2] They have an arrangement of groups of
three leaves that run parallel with the stem. While the branchlets have an
appearance of being grooved due to the base of the leaves running down the
stem as a wing.[3] Cones form on slender fruiting branchlets that are solitary
from one another.[2] Both the male and female cones form on the same tree.
With the male cones appearing on the end of branchlets at a size of 2-3mm
long. While the female cones form on a branchlet that have a waxy, greyish-
blue coloring during its development.[3] The female cone is oblong in shape
and measure a size of 10-13mm in diameter. The cones are covered in scales
that alternate and are short and narrow.[2] The central stalk of the cone is
short, narrow at the base and slightly angled. The seeds that get produced are
few in number, with only two unequal wings.[3]

## Range and habitat[edit]

Map of Queensland, Australia

Callitris baileyi is found in Southeast Queensland, Australia sporadically.
With more than ten known locations ranging from places like the state border
of Southeast Queensland, to Goomeri in northern Australia, and as far west as
the Bunya Mountains range. However, there has been some smaller patches of
subpopulations found in private lands such as the Koreelah National Park which
is west of Woodenbong. [4] These subpopulations have been severely fragmented
due to widespread habitat fragmentation throughout its range[4]

Callitris baileyi was once found in Acacia Creek and Sandilands near Tabulam
in New South Wales, however, now it ceases to occupy that area. [4]

Callitris baileyi is a terrestrial plant system, that grows on rocky slopes,
hilly or mountainous areas, in shallow and often clay soils. [3] At an extent
of occurrence between 15,000 and 25,000 km2. [1] It is found in eucalypt
woodland, commonly associated with Ironbark, Blue Gum and Spotted Gum trees.
Compared to the New South Wales sub-population that emerges in open grassy
eucalypt forest near creeks.[1]

## Habitat decline and conservation[edit]

Over the years the population of Callitris baileyi has been in decline to the
point of Near Threatened (IUCN 3.1)[3] status. This has largely been due to
inappropriate fire regimes, which is the act of frequent low-intensity burning
to reduce fuel loads. This method is used to promote grass growth for cattle
grazing or agriculture, which over time prevents regeneration and can lead to
the elimination of the species subpopulations. This type of fragmentation of
the species is becoming more prevalent outside of national parks.[4]

Another factor into the species habitat decline is the invasion by alien
invasive weeds in a limited part of its range is inferred. Alien invasive
weeds such as Lantana camara are a problem in some parts of its range in
Queensland.[4]

Recent conservation efforts have been made by the New South Wales state
legislation to list the species as Endangered, while in the state of
Queensland, Australia has it listed as Near Threatened. The Callitris baileyi
has been recorded in several national parks such as the Bunya Mountains
National Park in Queensland and Koreelah National Park in New South Wales.[2]

Bunya Mountains National Park in Queensland

## References[edit]

  1. ^ a b c d Thomas, P. (2013). "Callitris baileyi". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T34072A2842980. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T34072A2842980.en. Retrieved 9 November 2017.
  2. ^ a b c d e Cite error: The named reference `:0` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  3. ^ a b c d e f g Cite error: The named reference `:2` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  4. ^ a b c d e Cite error: The named reference `:1` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 

[1]

[2]

[3]

  

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q2665238
  * Wikispecies: Callitris baileyi
  * ARKive: callitris-baileyi
  * Conifers.org: Callitris_baileyi
  * EoL: 128310
  * EPPO: CLWBA
  * GBIF: 2684287
  * GRIN: 416642
  * iNaturalist: 136285
  * IPNI: 676679-1
  * IUCN: 34072
  * Plant List: kew-2692858
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:676679-1
  * Tropicos: 9400661
  * WCSP: 382333

  
  
  

This Australian plant article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding
it.

  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
This conifer-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding
it.

  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
  1. ^ "Bailey's cypress - Callitris baileyi". wetlaninfo Queensland Government. Department of Environment and Science. Retrieved 13 March 2018.
  2. ^ Thomas, P. "Callitris baileyi". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species(tm). The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2013: e.T34072A2842980. Retrieved 29 April 2018.
  3. ^ White, C.T. (1923). "A new conifer from southern Queensland". Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales (68): 449. `|access-date=` requires `|url=` (help)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Callitris_baileyi&oldid=842376241"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List near threatened species
  * Callitris
  * Pinales of Australia
  * Trees of Australia
  * Vulnerable flora of Australia
  * Nature Conservation Act rare biota
  * Vulnerable biota of Queensland
  * Rare flora of Australia
  * Flora of Queensland
  * Australian plant stubs
  * Conifer stubs

Hidden categories:

  * Pages with reference errors
  * Pages with broken reference names
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonomy articles created by Polbot
  * All stub articles
  * Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Francais
  * Portugues
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 22 May 2018, at 01:53 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

