# Juniperus virginiana

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Juniperus virginiana  
Juniperus virginiana incorporated into a golf course in northern Virginia  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Juniperus  
Section: Juniperus sect. Sabina  
Species:  J. virginiana  
Binomial name  
Juniperus virginiana  
L.  
Natural distribution of varieties virginiana (green)  
and silicicola (red)  
  
Juniperus virginiana - its common names include red cedar, eastern
redcedar,[2][3] Virginian juniper,[4] eastern juniper, red juniper, pencil
cedar, and aromatic cedar - is a species of juniper native to eastern North
America from southeastern Canada to the Gulf of Mexico and east of the Great
Plains.[3] Further west it is replaced by the related Juniperus scopulorum
(Rocky Mountain juniper) and to the southwest by Juniperus ashei (Ashe
juniper).[5][6][7]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Ecology
  * 3 Uses
  * 4 Allergen
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

## Description[edit]

Juniperus virginiana foliage and mature cones

Juniperus virginiana is a dense slow-growing coniferous evergreen tree that
may never become more than a bush on poor soil, but is ordinarily from 5-20 m
or 16-66 ft tall, with a short trunk 30-100 cm or 12-39 inches in diameter
(rarely to 27 m or 89 ft in height, and 170 cm or 67 inches in diameter. The
oldest tree reported, from West Virginia, was 940 years old.[8][9] The bark is
reddish-brown, fibrous, and peels off in narrow strips. The leaves are of two
types; sharp, spreading needle-like juvenile leaves 5-10 mm (3/16-3/8 in)
long, and tightly adpressed scale-like adult leaves 2-4 mm (1/16-3/16 in)
long; they are arranged in opposite decussate pairs or occasionally whorls of
three. The juvenile leaves are found on young plants up to 3 years old, and as
scattered shoots on adult trees, usually in shade. The seed cones are 3-7 mm
(1/8-1/4 in) long, berry-like, dark purple-blue with a white wax cover giving
an overall sky-blue color (though the wax often rubs off); they contain one to
three (rarely up to four) seeds, and are mature in 6-8 months from
pollination. The juniper berry is an important winter food for many birds,
which disperse the wingless seeds. The pollen cones are 2-3 mm (1/16-1/8 in)
long and 1.5 mm (1/16 in) broad, shedding pollen in late winter or early
spring. The trees are usually dioecious, with pollen and seed cones on
separate trees.[5][6][7]

There are two varieties,[2] which intergrade where they meet:[5][6][7]

  * Juniperus virginiana var. virginiana is called eastern juniper / redcedar. It is found in eastern North America, from Maine, west to southern Ontario and South Dakota, south to northernmost Florida and southwest into the post oak savannah of east-central Texas. Cones are larger, 4-7 mm (3/16-1/4 in); scale leaves are acute at apex and bark is red-brown.
  * Juniperus virginiana var. silicicola (Small) E.Murray (syn. Sabina silicicola Small, Juniperus silicicola (Small) L.H.Bailey) is known as southern or sand juniper / redcedar. Its variety name means "flint-dweller", from Latin silex and -cola. Habitat is along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts from the extreme Southeastern corner of Virginia,[10] south to central Florida and west to southeast Texas. Cones are smaller, 3-4 mm (1/8-3/16 in); scale leaves are blunt at apex and the bark is orange-brown. It is treated by some authors at the lower rank of variety, while others treat it as a distinct species.

## Ecology[edit]

Characteristic shape in old field succession

Eastern juniper is a pioneer species, which means that it is one of the first
trees to repopulate cleared, eroded, or otherwise damaged land. It is
unusually long lived among pioneer species, with the potential to live over
900 years. It is commonly found in prairies or oak barrens, old pastures, or
limestone hills, often along highways and near recent construction
sites.[5][6][11] It is an alternate host for cedar-apple rust, an economically
significant fungal disease of apples, and some management strategies recommend
the removal of J. virginiana near apple orchards[12]

In many areas it is considered an invasive species, even if native. It is
fire-intolerant, and was previously controlled by periodic wildfires. Low
branches near the ground burn and provide a ladder that allows fire to engulf
the whole tree. Grasses recover quickly from low severity fires that are
characteristic of prairies that kept the trees at bay. With the urbanization
of prairies, the fires have been stopped with roads, plowed fields, and other
fire breaks, allowing J. virginiana and other trees to invade.[13] Trees are
destructive to grasslands if left unchecked, and are actively being eliminated
by cutting and prescribed burning.[14] The trees also burn very readily, and
dense populations were blamed for the rapid spread of wildfires in drought
stricken Oklahoma and Texas in 2005 and 2006.[15]

Eastern juniper benefits from increased CO2 levels, unlike the grasses with
which it competes. Many grasses are C4 plants that concentrate CO2 levels in
their bundle sheaths to increase the efficiency of RuBisCO, the enzyme
responsible for photosynthesis, while junipers are C3 plants that rely on (and
may benefit from) the natural CO2 concentrations of the environment, although
they are less efficient at fixing CO2 in general.[16]

Damage done by J. virginiana includes outcompeting forage species in
pastureland. The low branches and wide base occupy a significant portion of
land area. The thick foliage blocks out most light, so few plants can live
under the canopy. The needles that fall raise the pH of the soil, making it
alkaline, which holds nutrients such as phosphorus, making it harder for
plants to absorb them. Juniperus virginiana has been shown to remove nitrogen
from the soil after invading prairies.[17] It has also been found to reduce
carbon stores in the soil. This reduction in soil nutrients also reduces the
amount and diversity of microbial activity in the soil.[18]

Cedar waxwings are fond of the "berries" of these junipers. It takes about 12
minutes for their seeds to pass through the birds' guts, and seeds that have
been consumed by this bird have levels of germination roughly three times
higher than those of seeds the birds did not eat. Many other birds (from
bluebirds to turkeys) and many mammals also consume them.[11]

## Uses[edit]

A log sawn in two and turned on a lathe, exposing the pale sapwood and the
reddish heartwood

"Berries" of the 'Corcorcor' cultivar

The fine-grained, soft brittle pinkish- to brownish-red heartwood is fragrant,
very light and very durable, even in contact with soil. Because of its rot
resistance, the wood is used for fence posts. The aromatic wood is avoided by
moths, so it is in demand as lining for clothes chests and closets, often
referred to as cedar closets and cedar chests. If correctly prepared, it makes
excellent English longbows, flatbows, and Native American sinew-backed bows.
The wood is marketed as "eastern redcedar" or "aromatic cedar". The best
portions of the heartwood are one of the few woods good for making pencils,
but the supply had diminished sufficiently by the 1940s that it was largely
replaced by incense-cedar.[11]

Juniper oil is distilled from the wood, twigs and leaves. The essential oil
contains cedrol which has toxic and possibly carcinogenic properties.[19] The
cones are used to flavor gin.

Native American tribes have historically used juniper wood poles to mark out
agreed tribal hunting territories. French traders named Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, (meaning "red stick") from the reddish color of these poles. It is
still used in ceremony by some Nations.

The Cahokia Woodhenge series of timber circles built by the precolumbian
Mississippian culture in western Illinois was constructed using massive red
cedar logs. One version of the circle, Woodhenge III(thought to have been
constructed in approximately 1000 CE), had 48 posts in the 410 feet (120 m)
diameter circle and a 49th pole in the center.[20]

Among many Native American cultures, the smoke of the burning cedar is used to
drive away evil spirits prior to conducting a ceremony, such as a healing
ceremony.[21]

During the Dust Bowl drought of the 1930s, the Prairie States Forest Project
encouraged farmers to plant shelterbelts (wind breaks) made of eastern juniper
throughout the Great Plains. They thrive under adverse conditions - both
drought tolerant and cold tolerant, they grow well in rocky, sandy, and clay
substrates. Competition between trees is minimal, so they can be planted in
tightly spaced rows, and the trees still grow to full height, creating a solid
windbreak in a short time.[22]

A number of cultivars have been selected for garden planting, including
'Canaertii' (narrow conical; female) 'Corcorcor' (with a dense, erect crown;
female), 'Goldspire' (narrow conical with yellow foliage), and 'Kobold'
(dwarf). Some cultivars previously listed under this species, notably
'Skyrocket', are actually cultivars of J. scopulorum.[23]

In the Missouri, Oklahoma and Arkansas Ozarks, eastern juniper is commonly
used as a Christmas tree.

## Allergen[edit]

The pollen is a known allergen, although not as potent as that of the related
Juniperus ashei (Ashe juniper), which sheds pollen a month earlier. People
allergic to one are usually allergic to both. J. virginiana sheds pollen as
early as late winter and through early spring. Consequently, what begins as an
allergy to Ashe juniper in the winter may extend into spring, since the
pollination of the eastern juniper follows that of the Ashe juniper.

Contact with the leaves or wood can produce a mild skin rash in some
individuals.

## See also[edit]

  * Cedar wood

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2011). "Juniperus virginiana". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42257A2967510. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42257A2967510.en. Retrieved 11 November 2016.
  2. ^ a b Adams, Robert P. (1993). "Juniperus virginiana". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  3. ^ a b "Juniperus virginiana". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA. Retrieved 22 January 2016.
  4. ^ "BSBI List 2007". Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-01-25. Retrieved 2014-10-17.
  5. ^ a b c d Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4
  6. ^ a b c d Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Juniperus virginiana". The Gymnosperm Database.
  7. ^ a b c Adams, R. P. (2004). Junipers of the World. Trafford. ISBN 1-4120-4250-X
  8. ^ "Juniperus virginiana". Eastern OLDLIST. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
  9. ^ Steelhammer, Rick (12 April 2012). "Oldest Table Mountain Pine in Pendleton". Charleston Gazette-Mail. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
  10. ^ "Virginia's Timber Industry -- An Assessment of Timber Product Output and Use, 2007" (PDF). Dof.virginia.gov. Retrieved 4 August 2018.
  11. ^ a b c Barlow, Virginia (Winter 2004). "Species in the Spotlight: Eastern Redcedar, Juniperus virginiana". Northern Woodlands. Center for Northern Woodlands Education. 11 (43): 37. Retrieved July 29, 2009.
  12. ^ West Virginia University: Cedar-Apple Rust, Gymnosporangium juniperi-virginianae Archived 2007-11-12 at the Wayback Machine.
  13. ^ "Forest Plan" (PDF). fs.fed.us.
  14. ^ Noble Foundation: News Release Archived 2007-01-24 at the Wayback Machine.
  15. ^ "Wildfires Rip Through Oklahoma". CNN. January 1, 2006. Retrieved April 11, 2007.
  16. ^ McKinley, Duncan C., and John M. Blair. "Woody Plant Encroachment by Juniperus virginiana in a Mesic Native Grassland Promotes Rapid Carbon and Nitrogen Accrual." Ecosystems 11.3 (Apr. 2008): 454-468.
  17. ^ Norris, Mark D., John M. Blair, and Loretta C. Johnson. "Altered Ecosystem Nitrogen Dynamics as a Consequence of Land Cover Change in Tallgrass Prairie." American Midland Naturalist 158.2 (Oct. 2007): 432-445.
  18. ^ McKinley, Duncan C., and John M. Blair. "Woody Plant Encroachment by Juniperus virginiana in a Mesic Native Grassland Promotes Rapid Carbon and Nitrogen Accrual." Ecosystems 11.3 (Apr. 2008): 454-468.
  19. ^ Sabine, J.R. (1975). "Exposure to an environment containing the aromatic red cedar, Juniperus virginiana: procarcinogenic, enzyme-inducing and insecticidal effects". Toxicology. Elsevier. 5 (2): 221-235. doi:10.1016/0300-483X(75)90119-5. PMID 174251.
  20. ^ Iseminger, William R. "The Skywatchers of Cahokia". Mexicolore. Retrieved 2017-12-19.
  21. ^ Lyon, William S. (1998). Encyclopedia of Native American Healing. W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. p. 173\. ISBN 0-393-31735-8.
  22. ^ "USDA Fact Sheet" (PDF). ufl.edu.
  23. ^ Welch, H., & Haddow, G. (1993). The World Checklist of Conifers. Landsman's. ISBN 0-900513-09-8.

## External links[edit]

Wikispecies has information related to Juniperus virginiana  
  
  * PollenLibrary.com - Red Cedar distribution map and allergen information
  * Lawson, Edwin R. (1990). "Juniperus virginiana". In Burns, Russell M.; Honkala, Barbara H. Conifers. Silvics of North America. Washington, D.C.: United States Forest Service (USFS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1 - via Southern Research Station (www.srs.fs.fed.us).

  * Interactive Distribution Map of Juniperus virginiana

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juniperus virginiana.  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q157522
  * Wikispecies: Juniperus virginiana
  * EoL: 1061664
  * EPPO: IUPVI
  * FNA: 210000931
  * FoC: 210000931
  * GBIF: 2684391
  * GRIN: 20878
  * iNaturalist: 49399
  * IPNI: 132551-2
  * IRMNG: 10928973
  * ITIS: 18048
  * IUCN: 42257
  * NBN: NBNSYS0000042118
  * NCBI: 39584
  * NZOR: 38cacf76-90e0-4243-ac1f-ba31c1542491
  * PfaF: Juniperus virginiana
  * Plant List: kew-2331595
  * PLANTS: JUVI
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:132551-2
  * Tropicos: 9400157
  * VASCAN: 4709
  * WCSP: 377287

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juniperus_virginiana&oldid=853442845"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Juniperus
  * Dioecious plants
  * Trees of the Eastern United States
  * Trees of the North-Central United States
  * Trees of the Northeastern United States
  * Trees of the Southeastern United States
  * Trees of the Southern United States
  * Trees of the South-Central United States
  * Trees of the Great Lakes region (North America)
  * Trees of the Plains-Midwest (United States)
  * Flora of the Appalachian Mountains
  * Trees of Ontario
  * Plants described in 1753
  * Taxa named by Carl Linnaeus
  * Least concern flora of the United States
  * Garden plants of North America
  * Plants used in bonsai
  * Ornamental trees

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Asturianu
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????
  * ?????????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Euskara
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Gaeilge
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * ??????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Slovencina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 4 August 2018, at 20:49 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

