# Juniperus ashei

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Juniperus ashei  
J. ashei shedding pollen: mature male on right, immature tree on left, mature
green females in background  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom:  Plantae  
Division:  Pinophyta  
Class:  Pinopsida  
Order:  Pinales  
Family:  Cupressaceae  
Genus:  Juniperus  
Species:  J. ashei  
Binomial name  
Juniperus ashei  
J. Buchholz  
Natural range of Juniperus ashei  
Synonyms  
  
J. sabinoides (H.B.K.) Nees sensu Sargent  
J. mexicana Spreng.  
J. monticola Martinez  
Sabina sabinoides (H.B.K.) Small [2]  
  
Juniperus ashei (Ashe juniper, post cedar, mountain cedar, or blueberry
juniper) is a drought-tolerant evergreen tree, native to northeastern Mexico
and the south-central United States north to southern Missouri; the largest
areas are in central Texas, where extensive stands occur. It grows up to 10
metres (33 ft) tall, rarely 15 metres (49 ft), and provides erosion control
and year-round shade for wildlife and livestock.

The feathery foliage grows in dense sprays, bright green in color. The leaves
are scale-like, 2 to 5 millimetres (0.079 to 0.197 in) long, and produced on
rounded (not flattened) shoots. It is a dioecious species, with separate male
and female plants. The seed cones are round, 3 to 5 millimetres (0.12 to 0.20
in) long, and soft, pulpy and berry-like, green at first, maturing purple
about 8 months after pollination. They contain 1-2 seeds, which are dispersed
when birds eat the cones and pass the seeds in their droppings. The male cones
are 3-5 mm long, yellow, turning brown after pollen release in December to
February.

## Contents

  * 1 Allergy
  * 2 Uses
  * 3 Texas
  * 4 Overgrazed lands
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

## Allergy[edit]

The pollen causes a severe allergic reaction for some people in the winter,
and people who are allergic to Ashe juniper are also often allergic to the
related Juniperus virginiana. Consequently, what begins as an allergy in the
winter may extend into spring since the pollination of J. virginiana follows
that of J. ashei. Ashe juniper is sometimes known in the area as "mountain
cedar" (although neither it nor J. virginiana are cedars), and locals usually
refer to the allergy as cedar fever. Left untreated, symptoms of cedar fever
may develop into a more severe infection such as pneumonia.

## Uses[edit]

The wood is naturally rot resistant and provides raw material for fence posts.
Posts cut from old-growth Ashe junipers have been known to last in the ground
for more than 50 years. Over one hundred years ago, most old-growth Ashe
junipers were cut and used not only for fence posts, but also for telegraph
poles and railroad ties.[3]

## Texas[edit]

When Europeans first came to the Hill Country, they sought out the cypress,
post oaks and native cedar (Ashe juniper) since they provided the best
building materials. The first Spanish that came in the mid-1700s built Hill
Country missions using the Ashe juniper for roof beams. As a result of poor
land management, the soil turned to caliche as soil eroded following decades
of clearcutting and overgrazing. One of the only plants that could handle the
rocky soil was the Ashe juniper. Grasses could not establish on thin rocky
soils on the more rolling to flat areas, so the junipers took over there as
well.

These days Ashe Junipers are now considered a weed by many landowners. Some
believe that it captures large amounts of water, denying it to other plants,
thus causing them to die out and allowing the Ashe Juniper to take over,
although new evidence based on better research techniques conflicts with these
claims.

Ranchers also consider it to be a pest plant because overgrazing by cattle
selectively removes competition when they avoid the bitter-tasting juniper
seedlings. This allows for a high rate of juniper establishment and reduces
ranch yields. Ashe juniper does not resprout when cut; but its cousin, the
redberry juniper does resprout.[4]

## Overgrazed lands[edit]

The junipers that establish on overgrazed lands are young and vigorous, dense
and multi-trunked, and shallow rooted. This directly contrasts the Ashe
junipers the first settlers found that were large, mostly single trunk trees
with some producing logs that were 2-3' in diameter and 40' long.

Where junipers do grow bushy on thinned, eroded soils, it is difficult for
remaining grasses to compete for water, especially if they are still being
grazed and the soils are impoverished. The presence of these dense, shallow-
rooted shrubs also means less water reaches the soil than areas with sparse,
short grasses, subsurface flows and deep drainage. However, their dense
canopies and thick litter do reduce overland flows compared to grazed grasses.
Also, much more water is evaporated from the sparse grass areas than
originally calculated. Old-growth Ashe junipers are different in that they
have true trunks, use less water, are slow growing, less foliated and have
very deep roots. Wilcox (Texas A&M University) and Keith Owens (Texas Ag. Ext.
researcher at Uvalde) are currently studying how these deeper roots may
facilitate the deep drainage of water down trunk stemflows. Dr. Owens reports
that for every one inch of rain, about 6 gallons of previously undocumented
water is funneled down the trunks.[5]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Juniperus ashei". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42224A2962793. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42224A2962793.en. Retrieved 9 November 2017.
  2. ^ United States Forest Service
  3. ^ Bray, William L., 1904. Forest Resources of Texas, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Forestry, Bulletin No. 47. Government Printing Office: Washington D.C.
  4. ^ McGinty, Allan (18 March 1997). "JUNIPER ECOLOGY". unidentified. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 2009-01-10.
  5. ^ Owens, M.K., R.K. Lyons and C.J. Alejandro. 2006. Rainfall partitioning within semiarid juniper communities: Effects of event size and canopy cover. Hydrological Processes 20:3179-3189.

  * Conifer Specialist Group (1998). "Juniperus ashei". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2006. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 12 May 2006.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juniperus ashei.  
  
  * Image Archive of Central Texas Plants detailed photographs
  * Noble Foundation Plant Image Gallery photographs
  * Photograph and dimensions of Texas Champion Ashe juniper
  * Evaluation of the Effects of Ashe Juniper (Cedar) Control on Water Quantity, Water Quality, and Suspended-Sediment Loads in three watersheds on the Edwards Aquifer Recharge and Catchment Area, South-Central Texas

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q309507
  * Wikispecies: Juniperus ashei
  * Conifers.org: Juniperus_ashei
  * EoL: 323369
  * EPPO: IUPAS
  * FNA: 233500722
  * GBIF: 2684487
  * GRIN: 20807
  * iNaturalist: 135927
  * IPNI: 676796-1
  * IRMNG: 10453175
  * ITIS: 194812
  * IUCN: 42224
  * NCBI: 13101
  * PfaF: Juniperus ashei
  * Plant List: kew-2332607
  * PLANTS: JUAS
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:132457-2
  * Tropicos: 9400375
  * WCSP: 377454

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juniperus_ashei&oldid=849463107"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Juniperus
  * Flora of Northeastern Mexico
  * Flora of the Plains-Midwest (United States)
  * Trees of the South-Central United States
  * Dioecious plants

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????
  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Norsk
  * ??????
  * ???????
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 9 July 2018, at 05:52 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

