# Phyllocladus aspleniifolius

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Phyllocladus aspleniifolius  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Podocarpaceae  
Genus: Phyllocladus  
Species:  P. aspleniifolius  
Binomial name  
Phyllocladus aspleniifolius  
(Labill.) Hook.f.  
  
Phyllocladus aspeniifolius

Buds of Phyllocladus aspleniifolius. Photo courtesy of Rob Wiltshire.

Phyllocladus aspleniifolius, commonly known as the celerytop pine, is an
endemic gymnosperm of Tasmania, Australia. It is widespread and common in
Tasmania, with the most abundance in the western highlands. Its 'leaves'
appear similar to those of a celery plant, hence the common name.

Phyllocladus aspleniifolius

## Contents

  * 1 Description [2]
  * 2 Habitat and distribution
  * 3 Uses
  * 4 Threats and conservation
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

## Description [2][edit]

Phyllocladus aspeniifolius is a large, conical conifer in the Podocarpaceae
family. The trunk is erect with horizontal branches. True leaves appear at the
seedling stage and are fine and needle-like. Mature leaves are reduced to
minute, brown scales. The function of the leaf is taken over by cladodes that
look like green diamond shaped leaves, similar to the leaves of a celery
plant, hence the common name "celery-top pine". The cladodes are thick and
flattened, 3-8 cm long borne spirally on green stems. The plant may bear male
and female cones on the same tree or separate trees in summer. The male cones
are cylindrical, 3-5 mm long, with 2-3 together at the end of side branches.
Female cones occur in groups of 3-4 in short, stalked clusters at the axils or
margins of the cladodes. Mature cones are a distinct fleshy pink to red, with
a white aril holding a hard, black, exposed seed.

## Habitat and distribution[edit]

Typical wet sclerophyll forest in Mt Field National Park, Tasmania, where
Phyllocladus aspleniifolius is found.

Phyllocladus aspeniifolius is endemic to Tasmania and is the most widespread
and abundant conifer in Tasmania. Commonly found in wet sclerophyll forest and
rainforest, from sea level to 1200m in the west and south west of the
state.[3] It will grow in all suitable habitat in Tasmania, and can also be
found in smaller populations in the north and east, and as a stunted shrub in
the higher altitude areas.

Phyllocladus aspleniifolius is a common constituent of cool temperate
rainforest vegetation types in Tasmania. When found with other rainforest
species such as Nothofagus cunnighamii, Atherosperma moschatum, and Eucryphia
lucida, the vegetation type can be defined as rainforest.[4] Phyllocladus
aspleniifolius dominates in rainforests with poorer soils, whereas Nothofagus
cunninghamii dominates rainforests on good soil types.[3] The largest
Phyllocladus aspeniifolius are found in wet sclerophyll forests with a canopy
of Eucalyptus spp,[1] and can be up to 800 years old.[2] They grow on acidic
soils derived from dolerite, granite or quartzite, that is well drained and
may be on boulder or scree slopes, in high rainfall areas with no marked
periods of drought.[1] They are less shade tolerant than their fellow
rainforest species, relying on a higher fire frequency for regeneration in
these areas[5] and regenerate freely in burnt forests.[3]

## Uses[edit]

The wood of this species is highly prized by fine furniture makers and wooden
boat builders. It grows to form a medium size tree in the forests at middle
altitudes. The wood of good sized trees is straight grained and dense, golden
brown, and not dissimilar to yew (Taxus).[1] It is considered a high value and
speciality species by the timber industry. The wood is hard and strong with
little shrinkage, bends and works well, and is very durable. The wood is used
for railway sleepers, flooring, ship masts, furniture, and cabinet work.[4]

Distribution of Phyllocladus aspleniffolius from Atlas of Living Australia

It makes an attractive container plant, but is slow growing, and prefers cool,
moist, acidic soil indicating it needs constant moisture in containers.[2]
Therefore, this species is rare in cultivation, and is limited to botanic
gardens and arboreta and a few private gardens.[1]

It has also been used to investigate climate change. Phyllocladus
aspleniifolius grows on a wide range of sites and appears sensitive to climate
conditions, therefore its pattern of ring width and wood density are used to
research past climate.[4]

## Threats and conservation[edit]

The largest threat to Phyllocladus aspleniifolius is logging for its high
value timber and presence in the wet sclerophyll forests that are subject to
clearfell harvesting practices. A large portion of the species is located in
protected forests in Tasmania or in forests open to logging with management
that allows for the persistence of native trees. The IUCN Red List, therefore
lists the species as "Least Concern",[1] indicating its persistent abundance
in Tasmania.

## References[edit]

  1. ^ a b c d e f Farjon, A. (2013). "Phyllocladus aspleniifolius". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42266A2968343. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42266A2968343.en. Retrieved 12 December 2017.
  2. ^ a b c Howells, C, ed. (2012). Tasmania's Natural Flora. Hobart, Tasmania: Australia Plants Society of Tasmania, Inc.
  3. ^ a b c Brown, M.J.; Hill, R.S. (1999). "Regional Action Plan: Conifers of Tasmania". In A. Farion and C.N. Page (eds.) Conifers. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan. Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK: IUCN. pp. 63-72.
  4. ^ a b c Naughton, P., ed. (1995). Forest Trees of Tasmania. Longreach, Tasmania: Forest Resources.
  5. ^ Read, J. (1985). The Dynamics of Northofagus cunninghamii rainforest associations in Tasmania- An ecophysiological approach. University of Tasmania: PhD Thesis.

  * Gymnosperm Database: Phyllocladus aspleniifolius
  * Photos of foliage, foliage and cones, cones

## External links[edit]

  * Media related to Phyllocladus aspleniifolius at Wikimedia Commons

Taxon identifiers  
  
Phyllocladus aspleniifolius

  * Wikidata: Q4484237
  * Wikispecies: Phyllocladus aspleniifolius
  * ARKive: phyllocladus-aspleniifolius
  * Conifers.org: Phyllocladus_asplenifolius
  * EoL: 1033614
  * Fossilworks: 277358
  * GBIF: 5284464
  * GRIN: 28137
  * iNaturalist: 123243
  * IPNI: 262597-1
  * IUCN: 42266
  * NCBI: 120602
  * NZOR: 29aac28d-7b23-472b-aef1-fca5deecdd93
  * Plant List: kew-2562664
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:262597-1
  * Tropicos: 31200040
  * WCSP: 380375

  
  
Podocarpus aspleniifolia

  * Wikidata: Q17363698
  * GBIF: 5665628
  * Tropicos: 25600049

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phyllocladus_aspleniifolius&oldid=842698932"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Podocarpaceae
  * Flora of Tasmania
  * Endemic flora of Tasmania
  * Trees of Australia
  * Pinales of Australia
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Least concern flora of Australia

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Francais
  * ???????
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 24 May 2018, at 02:50 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

