# Cupressus macrocarpa

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

"Macrocarpa" redirects here. For other uses, see Macrocarpa (disambiguation).

Monterey cypress  
The "Lone Cypress" near Monterey, California  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Vulnerable (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Cupressus  
Species:  C. macrocarpa  
Binomial name  
Cupressus macrocarpa  
Hartw. 1847  
Natural range in California  
Synonyms  
  
  * Callitropsis macrocarpa (Hartw.) D.P.Little
  * Cupressus hartwegii Carriere
  * Cupressus lambertiana Carriere
  * Cupressus reinwardtii Beissn.
  * Hesperocyparis macrocarpa (Hartw.) Bartel
  * Neocupressus macrocarpa (Hartw.) de Laub.

  
  
Cupressus macrocarpa, (now classed as Hesperocyparis macrocarpa),[2] commonly
known as Monterey cypress, is a species of cypress native to the Central Coast
of California. The native range of the species was confined to two small
relict populations, at Cypress Point in Pebble Beach and at Point Lobos near
Carmel, California.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Distribution
  * 3 Cultivation
  * 4 Chemistry
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

## Description[edit]

Cupressus macrocarpa is a medium-sized coniferous evergreen tree, which often
becomes irregular and flat-topped as a result of the strong winds that are
typical of its native area. It grows to heights of up to 40 meters (133 feet)
in perfect growing conditions, and its trunk diameter can reach 2.5 meters
(over 8 feet). The foliage grows in dense sprays which are bright green in
color and release a deep lemony aroma when crushed. The leaves are scale-like,
2-5 mm long, and produced on rounded (not flattened) shoots; seedlings up to a
year old have needle-like leaves 4-8 mm long.

The seed cones are globose to oblong, 20-40 mm long, with 6-14 scales, green
at first, maturing brown about 20-24 months after pollination. The pollen
cones are 3-5 mm long, and release their pollen in late winter or early
spring.[4][5][6] The Latin specific epithet macrocarpa means "with large
fruit".[7]

It has been widely reported that individual C. macrocarpa trees may be up to
2,000 years old, but this is disputed by botanists, and the longest-lived
report based on physical evidence is of a tree 284 years old.[8] The renowned
Californian botanist Willis Linn Jepson wrote that "the advertisement of [C.
macrocarpa trees] in seaside literature as 1,000 to 2,000 years old does not
... rest upon any actual data, and probably represents a desire to minister to
a popular craving for superlatives".[9]

Along with other New World Cupressus species, it has recently been transferred
to the genus Hesperocyparis, on genetic evidence that the New World Cupressus
are not very closely related to the Old World Cupressus species.[10][11]

## Distribution[edit]

The two native cypress forest stands are protected, within Point Lobos State
Reserve and Del Monte Forest. The natural habitat is noted for its cool, moist
summers, almost constantly bathed by sea fog.[4][5]

This species has been widely planted outside its native range, particularly
along the coasts of California and Oregon. Its European distribution includes
Great Britain (including the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands), France,
Ireland, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Sicily.[12] In New Zealand, plantings
have naturalized, finding conditions there more favorable than in its native
range. It has also been grown experimentally as a timber crop in Kenya.[4][6]

Cupressus macrocarpa is also grown in South Africa. For example, a copse has
been planted to commemorate South African infantry men who lost their lives in
the Allied cause in Italy and North Africa during WW2. As in California, the
Cape trees are gnarled and wind-sculpted, and very beautiful.

Trees showing typical wind-sculptured habit in its native area

## Cultivation[edit]

Monterey cypress has been widely cultivated away from its native range, both
elsewhere along the California coast, and in other areas with similar cool
summer, mild winter oceanic climates. It is a popular private garden and
public landscape tree in California.

When planted in areas with hot summers, for example in interior California
away from the coastal fog belt, Monterey cypress has proved highly susceptible
to cypress canker, caused by the fungus Seiridium cardinale, and rarely
survives more than a few years. This disease is not a problem where summers
are cool.[13]

A number of cultivars have been selected for garden use, including
'Goldcrest', with yellow-green, semi-juvenile foliage (with spreading scale-
leaf tips) and 'Lutea' with yellow-green foliage. 'Goldcrest' has gained the
Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit[14] (confirmed 2017).[15]

Monterey cypress is one of the parents of the fast-growing cultivated hybrid
Leyland cypress, Cupressus x Leylandii, the other parent being Nootka cypress,
Cupressus nootkatensis.[6]

The foliage is slightly toxic to livestock and can cause miscarriages in
cattle.[16] Sawn logs are used by many craftspeople, some boat builders and
small manufacturers, as a furniture structural material and a decorative wood
because of its fine colours. It is also a fast, hot burning, albeit sparky
(therefore not suited to open fires), firewood.

In Australia and New Zealand, it is most frequently grown as a windbreak tree
on farms, usually in rows or shelter belts. It is also planted in New Zealand
as an ornamental tree and, occasionally, as a timber tree. There, finding more
favorable growing conditions than in its native range, and in the absence of
many native pathogens, it often grows much larger, with trees recorded at over
40 m (130 ft) tall and 3 m (9.8 ft) in trunk diameter.[4][6] The timber was
used for fence posts on New Zealand farms before electric fencing became
popular.

Macrocarpa cultivars grown in New Zealand are:[17]

  * 'Aurea Saligna'--long cascades of weeping, golden-yellow, thread-like foliage on a pyramidal tree
  * 'Brunniana Aurea'--pillar or conical form with soft rich-golden foliage
  * 'Gold Rocket'--narrow erect form with golden colouring, slow-growing
  * 'Golden Pillar'--compact conical tree with dense yellow shoots and foliage
  * 'Greenstead Magnificent'--dwarf form with blue-green foliage
  * 'Lambertiana Aurea'--hardy upright form tolerating poor soil and climate conditions

Seedling showing needle-like juvenile leaves

'Goldcrest'

Semi-juvenile foliage of cultivar 'Goldcrest'  
  
## Chemistry[edit]

Isocupressic acid, a labdane diterpenoid, is an abortifacient component of C.
macrocarpa.[18] Monoterpenes (?- and ?-terpinene and terpinolene) are
constituents of the foliage volatile oil.[19] The oil exact composition is :
?-pinene (20.2%), sabinene (12.0%), p-cymene (7.0%) and terpinen-4-ol
(29.6%).[20] Unusual sesquiterpenes can be found in the foliage.[21]
Longiborneol (also known as juniperol or macrocarpol) can also be isolated
from Monterey cypresses.[22]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Cupressus macrocarpa". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (2013). doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T30375A2793139.en. `|access-date=` requires `|url=` (help)
  2. ^ http://calscape.org/Hesperocyparis-macrocarpa-()
  3. ^ C. Michael Hogan & Michael P. Frankis. 2009. Monterey Cypress: Cupressus macrocarpa, GlobalTwitcher.com ed. N. Stromberg
  4. ^ a b c d Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4
  5. ^ a b Eckenwalder, James E. (1993). "Cupressus macrocarpa". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  6. ^ a b c d K. Rushforth (1987). Conifers. Helm. ISBN 0-7470-2801-X.
  7. ^ Harrison, Lorraine (2012). RHS Latin for Gardeners. United Kingdom: Mitchell Beazley. ISBN 184533731X.
  8. ^ Willis Linn Jepson (1923). The Trees of California (2nd ed.). University of California Press. p. 75.
  9. ^ Willis Linn Jepson (1919). "Appendix I: scientific notes on the Monterey cypress". In Joseph H. Engbeck. Point Lobos Reserve State Park, California: Interpretation of a Primitive Landscape. University of California. pp. 86-87.
  10. ^ Damon P. Little (2006). "Evolution and circumscription of the true cypresses (Cupressaceae: Cupressus)". Systematic Botany. 31 (3): 461-480. doi:10.1600/036364406778388638. JSTOR 25064176.
  11. ^ Robert P. Adams; Jim A. Bartel; Robert A. Price (2009). "A new genus, Hesperocyparis, for the cypresses of the Western Hemisphere" (PDF). Phytologia. 91 (1): 160-185.
  12. ^ "Cupressus macrocarpa". Flora Europaea. Edinburgh: Royal Botanical Garden. 2008.
  13. ^ W. W. Wagener (1948). "Diseases of Cypresses". El Aliso. 1: 253-321.
  14. ^ "Cupressus macropcarpa 'Goldcrest'". Royal Horticultural Society. Retrieved 22 July 2013.
  15. ^ "AGM Plants - Ornamental" (PDF). Royal Horticultural Society. July 2017. p. 22. Retrieved 24 January 2018.
  16. ^ V. Sloss; J. W. Brady (1983). "Abnormal births in cattle following ingestion of Cupressus macrocarpa foliage". Australian Veterinary Journal. 60 (7): 223. doi:10.1111/j.1751-0813.1983.tb09593.x. PMID 6639522.
  17. ^ Staney J. Palmer (1990). Palmer's Manual of Trees, Shrubs and Climbers. Lancewood Publishing. ISBN 0-7316-9415-5.
  18. ^ K. Parton; D. Gardner; N. B. Williamson (1996). "Isocupressic acid, an abortifacient component of Cupressus macrocarpa". New Zealand Veterinary Journal. 44 (3). doi:10.1080/00480169.1996.35946.
  19. ^ Eugene Zavarin; Lorraine Lawrence; Mary C. Thomas (1971). "Compositional variations of leaf monoterpenes in Cupressus macrocarpa, C. pygmaea, C. goveniana, C. abramsiana and C. sargentii". Phytochemistry. 10 (2): 379-393. doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(00)94053-6.
  20. ^ Ruben A. Malizia; Daniel A. Cardell; Jose S. Molli; Silvia Gonzalez; Pedro E. Guerra; Ricardo J. Grau (2000). "Volatile constituents of leaf oils from the Cupressaceae family: Part I. Cupressus macrocarpa Hartw., C. arizonica Greene and C. torulosa Don species growing in Argentina". Journal of Essential Oil Research. 12 (1): 59-63. doi:10.1080/10412905.2000.9712042.
  21. ^ Laurence G. Cool (2005). "Sesquiterpenes from Cupressus macrocarpa foliage". Phytochemistry. 66 (2): 249-260. doi:10.1016/j.phytochem.2004.11.002.
  22. ^ Steven C. Welch; Roland L. Walters (1973). "Total syntheses of (+)-longicamphor and (+)-longiborneol". Synthetic Communications. 3 (6): 419-423. doi:10.1080/00397917308065935.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cupressus macrocarpa.  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q1137183
  * Wikispecies: Cupressus macrocarpa
  * APDB: 130994
  * ARKive: cupressus-macrocarpa
  * CNPS: 3315
  * Conifers.org: Cupressus_macrocarpa
  * EoL: 1034856
  * EPPO: CVBMC
  * FNA: 233500460
  * GBIF: 2684070
  * GRIN: 12659
  * iNaturalist: 322545
  * IPNI: 30188753-2
  * IRMNG: 11350720
  * ITIS: 183480
  * IUCN: 30375
  * NBN: NHMSYS0000457766
  * NCBI: 76352
  * NZOR: 43ed4cc0-1225-424c-9c15-44db641d8418
  * Plant List: kew-2748734
  * PLANTS: CUMA2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:30188753-2
  * Tropicos: 9400259
  * WCSP: 383187

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cupressus_macrocarpa&oldid=852761756"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List vulnerable species
  * Cupressus
  * Endemic flora of California
  * Natural history of the California Coast Ranges
  * Natural history of Monterey County, California
  * Trees of the Southwestern United States
  * Plants described in 1847
  * Trees of Mediterranean climate
  * Garden plants of North America
  * Ornamental trees
  * Vulnerable flora of California

Hidden categories:

  * Pages using citations with accessdate and no URL
  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????????
  * ?????????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Euskara
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * Norsk
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Simple English
  * ?????? / srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 31 July 2018, at 05:21 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

