# Thuja plicata

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Thuja plicata  
An old tree in Vancouver  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Thuja  
Species:  T. plicata  
Binomial name  
Thuja plicata  
Donn ex D.Don  
Range of T. plicata in the Pacific Northwest  
  
Thuja plicata, commonly called western[2] or Pacific redcedar,[3] giant or
western arborvitae,[3] giant cedar,[3] or shinglewood,[3] is a species of
Thuja, an evergreen coniferous tree in the cypress family Cupressaceae native
to western North America. It is not a true cedar of the genus Cedrus.

## Contents

  * 1 Distribution
  * 2 Description
  * 3 Taxonomy and name
  * 4 Notable specimens
  * 5 Uses
    * 5.1 Timber
    * 5.2 Cultivation
  * 6 Role in indigenous societies
    * 6.1 History
    * 6.2 Tools
    * 6.3 Wood
    * 6.4 Bark
  * 7 Legal status
  * 8 Health and safety
  * 9 See also
  * 10 References
  * 11 Works cited
  * 12 External links

## Distribution[edit]

Thuja plicata is among the most widespread trees in the Pacific Northwest. It
is associated with Douglas-fir and western hemlock in most places where it
grows. It is found at the elevation range of sea level to a maximum of 2,290 m
(7,510 ft) above sea level at Crater Lake in Oregon.[4] In addition to growing
in lush forests and mountainsides, western redcedar is also a riparian tree,
growing in many forested swamps and streambanks in its range.[5] The tree is
shade-tolerant and able to reproduce under dense shade.[6]

It has been introduced to other temperate zones, including western Europe,
Australia (at least as far north as Sydney), New Zealand,[7][8] the eastern
United States (at least as far north as Central New York),[citation needed]
and higher elevations of Hawaii.[9]

The species is naturalized in Britain.[10]

## Description[edit]

Thuja plicata is a large to very large tree, ranging up to 65 to 70 m (213 to
230 ft) tall and 3 to 4 m (9.8 to 13.1 ft) in trunk diameter, exceptionally
even larger.[11][12] Trees growing in the open may have a crown that reaches
the ground, whereas trees densely spaced together will exhibit a crown only at
the top, where light can reach the leaves.[13] It is long-lived; some
individuals can live well over a thousand years, with the oldest verified
being 1460 years.[11][12]

The foliage forms flat sprays with scale-like leaves in opposite pairs, with
successive pairs at 90 degrees to each other. The foliage sprays are green
above and green marked with whitish stomatal bands below; they are strongly
aromatic, with a scent reminiscent of pineapple when crushed. The individual
leaves are 1 to 4 mm (0.039 to 0.157 in) long and 1 to 2 mm (0.039 to 0.079
in) broad on most foliage sprays, but up to 12 mm (0.47 in) long on strong-
growing lead shoots.[11][12]

The cones are slender, 10 to 18 mm (0.39 to 0.71 in) long, and 4 to 5 mm (0.16
to 0.20 in) broad, with 8 to 12 (rarely 14) thin, overlapping scales. They are
green to yellow-green, ripening brown in fall about six months after
pollination, and open at maturity to shed the seeds. The seeds are 4 to 5 mm
long and 1 mm (0.039 in) broad, with a narrow papery wing down each side. The
pollen cones are 3 to 4 mm (0.12 to 0.16 in) long, red or purple at first, and
shed yellow pollen in spring.[11][12]

  * The bark is fibrous and longitudinally fissured. 

  * The leaves have white markings on the undersides of the flat foliage sprays. 

  * A shoot with pollen cones. 

  * A shoot with mature seed cones, Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest

## Taxonomy and name[edit]

Western red-cedars on Keats Island, British Columbia, in May 2017

Thuja plicata is one of two Thuja species native to North America, the other
being Thuja occidentalis. The species name plicata derives from the Latin word
plicare and means "folded in plaits" or "braided," a reference to the pattern
of its small leaves.[13]

Most authorities, both in Canada[14][15] and the United States[4][2][16][17]
cite the English name in two words as western redcedar, or occasionally
hyphenated as western red-cedar,[12] to indicate it is not a true cedar
(Cedrus), but it is also cited as western red cedar in some popular works. In
the American horticultural trade, it is also known as the giant arborvitae, by
comparison with arborvitae for its close relative Thuja occidentalis. Other
names include giant redcedar, Pacific redcedar, shinglewood, British Columbia
cedar, canoe cedar, and red cedar.[11][18] Arborvitae comes from the Latin for
"tree of life"; coincidentally, Native Americans of the West coast also
address the species as "long life maker".[18]

One endonymous name for the tree is the Halkomelem word xepa:y,[19] from the
roots xip, meaning "scratch" or "line", and a:y, "bark";[20] the former root
may be in reference to both the lined or "folded/braided" appearance of the
bark and the tree's ubiquity in carving and other forms of woodwork.

## Notable specimens[edit]

The largest living specimen is the Cheewhat Giant, in Pacific Rim National
Park Reserve on Vancouver Island, at 15,870 cubic feet (449 m3).[21] The
tallest known individual is the Willaby Creek Tree south of Lake Quinault, 195
feet (59 m) in height.[22]

The "Quinault Lake Redcedar" was the largest western redcedar in the world.

The "Quinault Lake Redcedar" was the largest known western redcedar in the
world, with a wood volume of 17,650 cubic feet (500 m3). Located near the
northwest shore of Lake Quinault north of Aberdeen, Washington, about 34 km
(21 mi) from the Pacific Ocean, it was one-third the volume of the largest
known tree, a giant sequoia named "General Sherman". The Quinault Lake
Redcedar was 174 feet (53 m) tall with a diameter of 19.5 feet (5.9 m) at
breast height. The "Quinault Lake Red Cedar" was destroyed by a series of
storms in 2014 and 2016 and is now only a glorified stump.[11][23] The fifth
known largest was the Kalaloch Cedar in the Olympic National Park, at 12,370
cubic feet (350 m3),[24] until it was destroyed by storm in March 2014.[25]

A redcedar over 71 m (233 ft) tall, 4.5 m (15 ft) in diameter, and over 700
years old stood in Cathedral Grove on Vancouver Island, British Columbia,
before it was set on fire and destroyed by vandals in 1972. That tree now lies
in "Giant's Grave", a self-dug 'grave' created by the force of its own
impact.[26]

## Uses[edit]

### Timber[edit]

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve
this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may
be challenged and removed. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this
template message)  
  
Canadian western redcedar cowl in the National Assembly for Wales

The soft red-brown timber has a tight, straight grain and few knots. It is
valued for its distinct appearance, aroma, and its high natural resistance to
decay, being extensively used for outdoor construction in the form of posts,
decking, shingles, and siding.[27] It is commonly used for the framing and
longwood in lightweight sail boats and kayaks. In larger boats it is often
used in sandwich construction between two layers of epoxy resin and/or
fibreglass or similar products. Due to its light weight--390 to 400 kg/m3 (24
to 25 lb/cu ft) dried--it is about 30% lighter than common boat building woods,
such as mahogany. For its weight it is quite strong but can be brittle. It
glues well with epoxy resin or resorcinol adhesive.

Note that the wood typically used as an insect-repelling closet lining and to
make cedar chests is a different species, Juniperus virginiana (also known as
red cedar).

Its light weight, strength, and dark, warm sound make it a popular choice for
guitar soundboards.

### Cultivation[edit]

Like its relative Thuja occidentalis and many other conifer species, Thuja
plicata is grown as an ornamental tree, and for screens and hedges, throughout
the world in gardens and parks. A wide variety of forms, sizes, and colours is
available.[28]

Cultivars

The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of
Garden Merit:

  * 'Atrovirens'[29]

  * 'Aurea'[30]

  * 'Stoneham gold'[31]

  
  
Other uses

Thujaplicin, a chemical substance, is found in mature trees and serves as a
natural fungicide,[32][33] thereby preventing the wood from rotting. This
effect lasts around a century even after the tree is felled. However,
thujaplicin is only found in older trees. Saplings that do not produce the
chemical often rot at an early stage, causing some trees to grow with a
somewhat hollow, rotten trunk.[18]

It is also widely used throughout Europe and America for making beehive
frames.

## Role in indigenous societies[edit]

Klallam people and canoe, ca. 1914

Western redcedar has an extensive history of use by Native Americans of
coastal Oregon to southeast Alaska. Some northwest coast tribes refer to
themselves as "people of the redcedar" because of their extensive dependence
on the tree for basic materials. The wood has been used for constructing
housing and totem poles, and crafted into many objects, including masks,
utensils, boxes, boards, instruments, canoes, vessels, houses, and ceremonial
objects. Roots and bark were used for baskets, bowls, ropes, clothing,
blankets, and rings.[34][35]

### History[edit]

A huge number of archeological finds point to the continuous use of redcedar
wood in native societies. Woodworking tools dating between 8000 and 5000 years
ago, such as carved antlers, were discovered in shell middens at the Glenrose
site, near Vancouver, British Columbia.[36] In Yuquot, on the west coast of
Vancouver Island, tools dating 4000 to 3000 years old have been found.[36] The
Musqueam site, also near Vancouver, yielded bark baskets woven in five
different styles, along with ropes and ships dated to 3000 years ago. At Pitt
River, adzes and baskets were dated around 2900 years aol. Wooden artifacts
1000 years old were unearthed on the east coast of Vancouver Island.[37]

Red cedar was used extensively wherever it was found along the northwest coast
(British Columbia, Washington state, Parts of Alaska). Evidence of this use is
found in CMTs (Culturally Modified Trees) that are found throughout the coast.
When First Nations people removed the bark from cedars, it left a scar - which
is considered a CMT. Other types of harvest (for planks, tinder, and other
uses) leave different types of evidence of cultural modification.

A legend amongst the Coast Salish peoples describes the origins of the western
redcedar. In this legend, there was a generous man who gave the people
whatever they needed. When the Great Spirit saw this, he declared that when
the generous man died, a great redcedar tree will grow where he is buried, and
that the cedar will be useful to all the people, providing its roots for
baskets, bark for clothing, and wood for shelter.[36]

### Tools[edit]

The wood was worked primarily with the adze, which was preferred over all
other tools, even ones introduced by European settlers. Alexander Walker, an
ensign on the fur trade ship Captain Cook, reported that the indigenous
peoples used an elbow adze, which they valued over new tools brought by the
Europeans, such as the saw or the axe, going so far as to modify traded tools
back into an adze. Tools were generally made from stone, bone, obsidian, or a
harder wood such as hemlock. A variety of hand mauls, wedges, chisels, and
knives were used. Excavations done at Ozette, Washington turned up iron tools
nearly 800 years old, far before European contact. When James Cook passed the
area, he observed that almost all tools were made of iron.[38] There has been
speculation on the origin of these iron tools. Some theories include
shipwrecks from East Asia or possible contact with iron-using cultures from
Siberia, as hinted in the more advanced woodworking found in northern tribes
such as the Tlingit.[38][39][40][41]

### Wood[edit]

A pole outside a six-post house at the University of British Columbia

Harvesting redcedars required some ceremony and included propitiation of the
tree's spirits as well as those of the surrounding trees. In particular, many
people specifically requested the tree and its brethren not to fall or drop
heavy branches on the harvester,[42] a situation which is mentioned in a
number of different stories of people who were not sufficiently careful. Some
professional loggers of Native American descent have mentioned that they offer
quiet or silent propitiations to trees which they fell, following in this
tradition.

Felling of large trees such as redcedar before the introduction of steel tools
was a complex and time-consuming art. Typically the bark was removed around
the base of the tree above the buttresses. Then some amount of cutting and
splitting with stone adzes and mauls would be done, creating a wide triangular
cut. The area above and below the cut would be covered with a mixture of wet
moss and clay as a firebreak. Then the cut would be packed with tinder and
small kindling and slowly burned. The process of cutting and burning would
alternate until the tree was mostly penetrated through, and then careful
tending of the fire would fell the tree in the best direction for handling.
This process could take many days. Constant rotation of workers was involved
to keep the fires burning through night and day, often in a remote and
forbidding location.[43]

Once the tree was felled, the work had only just begun, as it then had to be
stripped and dragged down to shore. If the tree was to become canoes, then it
would often be divided into sections and worked into rough canoe shapes before
transport. If it were to be used for a totem pole or building materials, it
would be towed in the round to the village.[44] Many trees are still felled in
this traditional manner for use as totem poles and canoes, particularly by
artists who feel that using modern tools is detrimental to the traditional
spirit of the art. Non-traditionalists simply buy redcedar logs or lumber at
mills or lumber yards, a practice that is commonly followed by most working in
smaller sizes such as for masks and staves.

Because felling required such an extraordinary amount of work, if only planks
for housing were needed, these would be split from the living tree. The bark
was stripped and saved, and two cuts were made at the ends of the planking.
Then wedges would be pounded in along the sides and the planks slowly split
off the side of the tree.[45] Trees which have been so harvested are still
visible in some places in the rainforest, with obvious chunks taken off of
their sides. Such trees usually continue to grow perfectly well, since
redcedar wood is resistant to decay. Planks are straightened by a variety of
methods, including weighing them down with stones, lashing them together with
rope, or forcing them between a line of stakes.[46]

Illustration of women pulling bark from a tree, from Indian Legends of
Vancouver Island by Alfred Carmichael

Redcedar wood is used to make huge monoxyla canoes in which the men went out
to high sea to harpoon whales and conduct trade.[47] One of those canoes, a
38-foot (12 m) craft dug out about a century ago, was bought in 1901 by
Captain John Voss, an adventurer. He gave her the name of Tilikum ("Relative"
in Chinook jargon), rigged her, and led her in a hectic three-year voyage from
British Columbia to London.[48]

Redcedar branches are very flexible and have good tensile strength. They were
stripped and used as strong cords for fishing line, rope cores, twine, and
other purposes where bark cord was not strong enough or might fray. Both the
branches and bark rope have been replaced by modern fiber and nylon cordage
among the aboriginal northwest coast peoples, though the bark is still in use
for the other purposes mentioned above.

### Bark[edit]

At the right time of year, the bark is easily removed from live trees in long
strips. It is harvested for use in making mats, rope and cordage, basketry,
rain hats, clothing, and other soft goods. The harvesting of bark must be done
with care, as stripping too much bark will kill the tree. To prevent this, the
harvester usually only harvests from trees which have not been stripped
before.[49] After harvesting, the tree is not used for bark again, although it
may later be felled for wood. Stripping bark is usually started with a series
of cuts at the base of the tree above any buttresses, after which the bark is
peeled upwards. To remove bark high up, a pair of platforms strung on rope
around the tree are used and the harvester climbs by alternating between them
for support. Since redcedars lose their lower branches as all tall trees do in
the rainforest, the harvester may climb 10 m (33 ft) or more into the tree by
this method. The harvested bark is folded and carried in backpacks.[50] It can
be stored for quite some time as mold does not grow on it, and is moistened
before unfolding and working. It is then split lengthwise into the required
width and woven or twisted into shape. Bark harvesting was mostly done by
women, despite the danger of climbing 10 meters in the air, because they were
the primary makers of bark goods.[51]

Today bark rope making is a lost art in many communities, although it is still
practiced for decoration or art in a few places. Other uses of bark are still
common for artistic or practical purposes. In recent years there has been a
revival of cedar weaving in some communities, and along with it, new forms of
cedar bark products. For example, in some recent weddings cedar roses are used
to decorate the tables.

## Legal status[edit]

Western red cedar is export-restricted in the United States under the Export
Administration Regulations.

## Health and safety[edit]

Western red cedar is highly allergenic and woodworkers or loggers who work
with it may have adverse reactions, including the development of occupational
asthma, exacerbation of existing asthma, reduction of lung function, and eye
irritation. Approximately 5% of workers are allergic to western red cedar. The
US Occupational Safety and Health Administration has set a permissible
exposure limit for red cedar dust of 2.5 mg/m3 as a time-weighted average over
8 hours.[52]

## See also[edit]

  * Cedar wood

## References[edit]

  1. ^ A. Farjon (2013). "Thuja plicata". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42263A2968155. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42263A2968155.en. Retrieved 15 January 2018.
  2. ^ a b "Thuja plicata". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA. Retrieved 10 December 2015.
  3. ^ a b c d "Thuja plicata". Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Agricultural Research Service (ARS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Retrieved 11 December 2017.
  4. ^ a b Minore, Don (1990). "Thuja plicata". In Burns, Russell M.; Honkala, Barbara H. Conifers. Silvics of North America. Washington, D.C.: United States Forest Service (USFS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1 - via Southern Research Station (www.srs.fs.fed.us).
  5. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 21.
  6. ^ Priestman, Lauren. "Plant Description: Thuja plicata/Western Red Cedar". Northern Rockies Natural History Guide. University of Montana, Missoula. Retrieved 21 July 2013.
  7. ^ Flora of North America, p. 411.
  8. ^ Hill 1985, p. 103.
  9. ^ Skolmen, Roger G. "Natural Durability of Some Woods Used in Hawaii". Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. U.S. Forest Service. Retrieved 21 July 2013.
  10. ^ "Thuja plicata". Interactive Flora of Northwest Europe.
  11. ^ a b c d e f Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Thuja plicata". The Gymnosperm Database.
  12. ^ a b c d e Farjon 2005.
  13. ^ a b Stewart 1984, p. 24.
  14. ^ British Columbia Forests & Range Tree Book: Thuja plicata
  15. ^ British Columbia Tree Species Compendium Western redcedar
  16. ^ Tesky, Julie L. (1992). "Thuja plicata". Fire Effects Information System (FEIS). US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service (USFS), Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory - via https://www.feis-crs.org/feis/.
  17. ^ Flora of North America.
  18. ^ a b c Stewart 1984, p. 22.
  19. ^ Dictionary of Upriver Halkomelem, Volume II pp. 1605. Galloway, Brent Douglas
  20. ^ Dictionary of Upriver Halkomelem, Volume I pp. 996. Galloway, Brent Douglas
  21. ^ Van Pelt 2001, p. 34.
  22. ^ Van Pelt 2001, p. 36.
  23. ^ Van Pelt 2001, p. 32.
  24. ^ Van Pelt 2001, p. 37.
  25. ^ Exotic Hikes, "Olympic National Park's Kalaloch Cedar Destroyed by Storm"
  26. ^ Picture of the Cathedral Grove stump.
  27. ^ Chase, Jeri (Fall 2008). "Western Redcedar, "Tree of Life"" (PDF). Forests for Oregon. Oregon Department of Forestry. pp. 18-19. Retrieved 18 September 2014.
  28. ^ Bitner 2007, p. 424.
  29. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja plicata 'Atrovirens'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.
  30. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja plicata 'Aurea'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.
  31. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja plicata 'Stoneham Gold'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.
  32. ^ Gardner 1963, p. 21.
  33. ^ Chedgy, Lim & Breuil 2009.
  34. ^ Stewart 1984, pp. 17-19.
  35. ^ Van Pelt 2001, p. 30.
  36. ^ a b c Stewart 1984, p. 27.
  37. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 26.
  38. ^ a b Stewart 1984, p. 36.
  39. ^ Pritzker 1998, p. 292.
  40. ^ Miller 2008, p. 67.
  41. ^ DeCapua, pp. 16-20
  42. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 39.
  43. ^ Stewart 1984, pp. 37-38.
  44. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 40.
  45. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 42.
  46. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 43.
  47. ^ McNeese 2002, p. 43.
  48. ^ Dill 2006, pp. 127-128.
  49. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 116.
  50. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 115.
  51. ^ Stewart 1984, p. 113.
  52. ^ "Wood Dust". OSHA/NIOSH. 28 September 2011.

## Works cited[edit]

  * Bitner, Richard L. (2007). Conifers for Gardens: an Illustrated Encyclopedia. United Kingdom: Timber Press. ISBN 0-88192-830-5.
  * Chedgy, Russell J.; Lim, Young Woon & Breuil, Colette (2009). "Effects of leaching on fungal growth and decay of western redcedar (Thuja plicata)". Canadian Journal of Microbiology. 55 (5): 578-586. doi:10.1139/W08-161. PMID 19483786.
  * DeCapua, Sarah (2010). The Tlingit. First Americans. Tarrytown, New York: Marshall Cavendish Benchmark. ISBN 0-7614-4135-2.
  * Dill, J. Gregory (2006). Myth, Fact, And Navigators' Secrets: Incredible Tales of the Sea And Sailors. Guilford, Connecticut: The Lyons Press. ISBN 1-59228-879-0.
  * Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4.
  * Chambers, Kenton L. (1993). "Thuja plicata". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  * Gardner, J. A. F. (1963). The Chemistry and Utilization of Western Red Cedar. Ottawa, Ontario: Department of Forestry. OCLC 65814710.
  * Hill, Anthony (1985). Antique Furniture in Australia. Victoria, British Columbia: Viking Press. ISBN 0-670-80319-7.
  * McNeese, Tim (2002). Early North America. St. Louis, Missouri: Milliken Publishing. ISBN 0-7877-0527-6.
  * Miller, Mike (2008). Alaska's Southeast: Touring the Inside Passage (11th ed.). Guilford, Connecticut: Globe Pequot Press. ISBN 0-7627-4535-5. ISSN 1545-1941.
  * Pritzker, Barry M. (1998). Native Americans: An Encyclopedia of History, Culture, and Peoples. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 0-87436-836-7.
  * Stewart, Hilary (1984). Cedar: Tree of Life to the Northwest Coast Indians. Vancouver, British Columbia: Douglas & McIntyre. ISBN 0-88894-437-3.
  * Van Pelt, Robert (2001). Forest Giants of the Pacific Coast. Global Forest Society and University of Washington Press. ISBN 0-295-98140-7.
  * Zsolt Debreczy; Istvan Racz (2012). Kathy Musial, ed. Conifers Around the World (1st ed.). DendroPress. p. 1089\. ISBN 963-219-061-0.

## External links[edit]

  * Media related to Thuja plicata at Wikimedia Commons

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q147417
  * Wikispecies: Thuja plicata
  * Calflora: 7981
  * EoL: 1034889
  * EPPO: THUPL
  * FNA: 200005457
  * FoC: 200005457
  * GBIF: 2684171
  * GRIN: 36593
  * iNaturalist: 48252
  * IPNI: 60443333-2
  * IRMNG: 10766935
  * ITIS: 18044
  * IUCN: 42263
  * NBN: NHMSYS0000464436
  * NCBI: 3316
  * NZOR: 61b96424-d2c3-48cc-95ec-67389cdb65fc
  * Plant List: kew-2433061
  * PLANTS: THPL
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:60443333-2
  * Tropicos: 9400235
  * VASCAN: 4712
  * WCSP: 378546

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thuja_plicata&oldid=852765890"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Thuja
  * Trees of the West Coast of the United States
  * Trees of Western Canada
  * Trees of the Northwestern United States
  * Trees of Alaska
  * Trees of British Columbia
  * Trees of the Southwestern United States
  * Flora of the Cascade Range
  * Flora of the Klamath Mountains
  * Flora of the Rocky Mountains
  * Flora of California
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Trees of Subarctic America
  * Plants described in 1824
  * Building materials
  * Provincial symbols of British Columbia
  * Least concern plants
  * Least concern flora of California
  * Least concern flora of North America
  * Least concern flora of the United States

Hidden categories:

  * Use dmy dates from July 2013
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013
  * Articles containing Halkomelem-language text
  * Articles needing additional references from February 2012
  * All articles needing additional references
  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * ?????????
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Islenska
  * Italiano
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Slovencina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Turkce
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 31 July 2018, at 06:18 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

