# Phyllocladus toatoa

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Phyllocladus toatoa  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Podocarpaceae  
Genus: Phyllocladus  
Species:  P. toatoa  
Binomial name  
Phyllocladus toatoa  
Molloy  
  
Phyllocladus toatoa, known as toatoa (Maori) or blue celery pine[2] is a
species of conifer in the family Podocarpaceae, endemic to New Zealand. It was
formerly referred to as P. glaucus.[3]

## Botanical description[edit]

Phyllocladus toatoa is a small, dioecious or monoecious, conical or bushy tree
that grows to 15 m (49 ft) in height and 60 cm (24 in) in diameter at maturity
on average.[2] The outer bark ranges in color from dark brown to a silvery-
brown.[3] P. toatoa is distinguishable from other species in the Phyllocladus
genus due to its whorled pinnate phylloclades with diamond-shaped segments.[2]
Attached to whorled branches are cladodes.[4] P. toatoa flowers between
October and December, leading to a fruiting stage between January and
March.[5] The fruit is a nut sitting in a cup shaped envelope.[4] Each fruit
contains 3-4 3 mm square shaped seeds which are black at maturity.[3]
Cultivated mature plants flower annually.[3] The species is wind pollinated by
male cones which produce large quantities of pollen.[3] Mature seeds are
dispersed from the cone through swelling of the cone bracts ejecting the seeds
to the ground.[3] Distribution is limited, resulting in many seeds landing on
the ground under the female tree.[3] Establishment of the species over a large
area indicates that P. toatoa is dispersed by wind and birds.[3] P. toatoa is
difficult to propagate and is relatively slow growing.[6]

## Range and habitat[edit]

Phyllocladus toatoa can be found in lowlands and montane forests including the
central North Island and northwards.[3] It is considered to be well protected
and not considered threatened.[3] Due to its tolerance of infertile soils, it
can be found on exposed ridges, around bog margins, and other poorly drained
land in New Zealand.[7] The preferred habitat is that of a temperate climate
with well-drained, moist soil, where roots are partially shaded and foliage is
exposed to sun.[5]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Phyllocladus toatoa". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42268A2968438. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42268A2968438.en. Retrieved 12 December 2017.
  2. ^ a b c Earle, Christopher J. "Phyllocladus toatoa Molloy 1996". Retrieved 21 March 2012. [dead link]
  3. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Molloy, B. P. J. (31 January 2012). "A new species name in Phyllocladus". New Zealand Journal of Botany. 34 (3): 287-297. doi:10.1080/0028825X.1996.10410695. Retrieved 21 March 2012.
  4. ^ a b "Phyllocladaceae". Retrieved 21 March 2012.
  5. ^ a b "NZ Plant Conservation Network". New Zealand Plant Conservation Network. Retrieved 21 March 2012.
  6. ^ "Non-Flowering seed plants: Native conifers". Archived from the original on 8 February 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2012.
  7. ^ "Takana Native Trees". Takana Nursery. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2012.

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q5409422
  * Wikispecies: Phyllocladus toatoa
  * Conifers.org: Phyllocladus_toatoa
  * EoL: 1033719
  * EPPO: PLDGL
  * GBIF: 5284472
  * GRIN: 416267
  * iNaturalist: 135733
  * IPNI: 994470-1
  * IUCN: 42268
  * NCBI: 254764
  * NZOR: b69eeedf-e7df-4149-9521-9b3644b0b731
  * Plant List: kew-2562654
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:994470-1
  * Tropicos: 50229905
  * WCSP: 380373

  
  
  

This conifer-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding
it.

  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
This New Zealand plant article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding
it.

  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phyllocladus_toatoa&oldid=842699200"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Podocarpaceae
  * Flora of New Zealand
  * Least concern plants
  * Conifer stubs
  * New Zealand plant stubs

Hidden categories:

  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from March 2014
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonomy articles created by Polbot
  * All stub articles

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Portugues
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 24 May 2018, at 02:53 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

