# Platycladus

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Platycladus orientalis)

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Chinese arborvitae  
Platycladus orientalis in its natural habitat in Simatai, Great Wall of China  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Near Threatened (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Subfamily: Cupressoideae  
Genus: Platycladus  
Spach  
Species:  P. orientalis  
Binomial name  
Platycladus orientalis  
(L.) Franco[2]  
Synonyms[3]  
  
  * Biota (D.Don) Endl., illegitimate superfluous name
  * Thuja orientalis L.
  * Biota orientalis (L.) Endl.
  * and dozens more in Cupressus, Thuja, Platycladus, Biota, Chamaecyparis, Juniperus, Retinispora, Widdringtonia

  
  
Platycladus is a distinct genus of evergreen coniferous tree in the cypress
family Cupressaceae, containing only one species, Platycladus orientalis, also
known as Chinese thuja,[4] Oriental arborvitae,[5] Chinese arborvitae, biota
or oriental thuja. It is native to northeastern parts of eastern Asia and
north Asia,[3][6] but is also now naturalised as an introduced species
elsewhere in Asia.

## Contents

  * 1 Taxonomy
  * 2 Etymology
  * 3 Description
  * 4 Distribution
  * 5 Uses
  * 6 Gallery
  * 7 References
    * 7.1 General references

## Taxonomy[edit]

Although generally accepted as the only member of its genus, it has been
suggested that the closely related species Microbiota decussata could be
included in Platycladus, but this is not widely followed. Other fairly close
relatives are Juniperus and Cupressus, both of these genera being graft-
compatible with Platycladus. In older texts, Platycladus was often included in
Thuja, which is reflected in one of its common names, "oriental thuja". But it
is only distantly related to the genus Thuja. Differences include its distinct
cones, wingless seeds, and its almost scentless foliage.

## Etymology[edit]

The binomial Platycladus means "with broad or flattened shoots". The qualifier
orientalis refers to its native habitat in China.[7]

The common name 'arborvitae' is from Latin, 'tree of life', and is based on
its association with long life and vitality in Buddhist thought in China. This
is probably based on the tree's unchanging evergreen nature in the cold dry
climate of northwest China, and its longevity; some of the larger specimens
planted around Buddhist temples in China are said to be in excess of 1,000
years old. It is called cebai (??) in Chinese.

## Description[edit]

A monoecious tree, it is small, slow-growing, reaching 15-20 m (49-66 ft) and
0.5 m (1 ft 8 in) trunk diameter (exceptionally to 30 m or 98 ft tall and 2 m
or 6 ft 7 in diameter in very old trees). The foliage forms in flat sprays
with scale-like leaves 2-4 mm (0.08-0.16 in) long, which are bright green in
colour but may turn brownish or coppery orange in winter. The cones are
1.5-2.5 cm (5/8-1 in) long, green ripening brown in about eight months from
pollination, and have 6-12 thick scales arranged in opposite pairs. The seeds
are 4-6 mm (0.16-0.24 in) long, with no wing.

The branches are relatively short, loosely arranged and, usually, sharply
directed upwards, and the bark, brownish, is detached in narrow vertical
strips. The twigs are compressed and are arranged in vertical planes. The
leaves, arranged in four rows, fleshy, opposite, decussate, truncated,
imbricated as adults, somewhat curved inwards, of uniform green color and with
a resiniferous gland on the underside. The female cones, of pink-salmon color
and later bluish-greenish when immature, centimetric and of annual maturation,
are oval with 6-8 flattened, thick scales, coriaceous and provided with an
apical hook.[8]

## Distribution[edit]

It is native to northwestern China, but it is delicate to distinguish the
areas where they are native safely from those where they have been introduced.
It is distributed in Manchuria, Russian Far East (Amur and Khabarovsk), and
now it is naturalised in Korea, Japan, India and Iran as well. It is also
cultivated in many parts of the world in parks, gardens, home yards,
cemeteries and for hedges.[9]

## Uses[edit]

Resistant to drought, it is very often used as an ornamental tree, both in its
homeland, where it is associated with long life and vitality, and very widely
elsewhere in temperate climates. It is suitable for form cuts and year-round
opaque hedges, but also forms impressive slender solitary trees. Several
cultivars have been selected, of which 'Aurea Nana'[10] has gained the Royal
Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.[11]

The wood is used in Buddhist temples both for (lavairos) construction work,
and chipped, for incense burning. Its twigs and leaves contain 0.12% essential
oil containing pinene and probably caryophyllene. The roots contain up to
2.75% of gasoline.[12]

## Gallery[edit]

Habit of young plant

Platycladus orientalis, Morton Arboretum acc. 168-53#3[13]

Mature trees

Mature tree

Very young female cones

Immature seed cones

Mature cones, with seeds visible

Mature cones

P. orientalis 'Rosedalis'

P. orientalis 'Rosedalis' leaf

P. orientalis 'Semperaurea' in winter

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Platycladus orientalis". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T31305A2803944. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T31305A2803944.en. Retrieved 13 December 2017.
  2. ^ "Platycladus orientalis". Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Agricultural Research Service (ARS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Retrieved 2008-02-19.
  3. ^ a b "Platycladus". World Checklist of Selected Plant Families (WCSP). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
  4. ^ "BSBI List 2007". Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-01-25. Retrieved 2014-10-17.
  5. ^ "Platycladus orientalis". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA. Retrieved 7 October 2015.
  6. ^ Fu, Liguo; Yu, Yong-fu; Adams, Robert P.; Farjon, Aljos. "Platycladus orientalis". Flora of China. 4 - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA.
  7. ^ Harrison, Lorraine (2012). RHS Latin for gardeners. United Kingdom: Mitchell Beazley. p. 224\. ISBN 9781845337315.
  8. ^ Kremer BP, Trees, Editorial Blume, Barcelona, 1986, Thuja orientalis L., p. 78
  9. ^ Armin Jagel, Veit Martin Doerken: Morphology and morphogenesis of the seed cones of the Cupressaceae - part II: Cupressoideae. Bull. CCP 4 (2), 2015, pp. 51-78
  10. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Platycladus orientalis 'Aurea Nana'". Retrieved 27 May 2013.
  11. ^ "AGM Plants - Ornamental" (PDF). Royal Horticultural Society. July 2017. p. 79. Retrieved 2 May 2018.
  12. ^ Armin Jagel, Thomas Stutzel: Studies on the morphology and morphogenesis of the seed cones of Platycladus orientalis (L.) Franco (= Thuja orientalis L.) and Microbiota decussata Kom. (Cupressaceae). Bot. Year syst. Bd. 123, 2001, pp. 337-404.
  13. ^ Cirrus Digital: Platycladus orientalis Morton Arboretum accession 168-53#3

### General references[edit]

  * Gymnosperm Database - Platycladus orientalis
  * Arboretum de Villardebelle - Platycladus cone photos
  * Conifers Around the World: Platycladus orientalis - Oriental Arborvitae.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Platycladus orientalis.  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Platycladus orientalis

  * Wikidata: Q33482
  * Wikispecies: Platycladus orientalis
  * APDB: 131027
  * ARKive: platycladus-orientalis
  * EoL: 41445
  * EPPO: THUOR
  * FoC: 200005428
  * GBIF: 2684855
  * GRIN: 310211
  * iNaturalist: 135659
  * IPNI: 677124-1
  * IRMNG: 10935146
  * ITIS: 183445
  * IUCN: 31305
  * NBN: NBNSYS0000042167
  * NCBI: 58046
  * NZOR: 65f6f7b4-e25c-4756-86d5-089c26521c84
  * Plantarium: 28657
  * Plant List: kew-2411523
  * PLANTS: PLOR80
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:677124-1
  * Tropicos: 24900394
  * WCSP: 378336

  
  
Thuja orientalis

  * Wikidata: Q15041676
  * GBIF: 2684860
  * GRIN: 36592
  * IPNI: 30155035-2
  * IRMNG: 11429583
  * ITIS: 183443
  * Tropicos: 9400234

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Platycladus&oldid=853817934"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List near threatened species
  * Cupressaceae
  * Monotypic conifer genera
  * Drought-tolerant trees
  * Flora of China
  * Garden plants of Asia
  * Medicinal plants
  * Near threatened plants
  * Ornamental trees
  * Plants used in traditional Chinese medicine
  * Trees of China

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Articles containing Chinese-language text
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????
  * ???????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Eesti
  * Espanol
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Interlingua
  * Italiano
  * ???????
  * ???????
  * Kurdi
  * Lietuviu
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Turkce
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * Zazaki
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 7 August 2018, at 04:07 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

