# Chamaecyparis thyoides

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Chamaecyparis thyoides  
Chamaecyparis thyoides near the edge of a bog in New Jersey  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 2.3)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Chamaecyparis  
Species:  C. thyoides  
Binomial name  
Chamaecyparis thyoides  
(L.) Britton, Sterns & Poggenb.  
Natural range of Chamaecyparis thyoides  
  
Chamaecyparis thyoides (Atlantic white cedar, Atlantic white cypress, southern
white cedar, whitecedar, or false-cypress), a species of Cupressaceae, is
native to the Atlantic coast of North America and is found from southern Maine
to Georgia and along the Gulf of Mexico coast from Florida to Mississippi. It
is one of two species of Chamaecyparis found in North America. C. thyoides
resides on the East Coast and C. lawsoniana can be found on the West Coast.
There are two geographically isolated subspecies, treated by some botanists as
distinct species, by others at just varietal rank: Chamaecyparis thyoides
thyoides and Chamaecyparis thyoides henryae (H.L.Li) E.Murray (syn.
Chamaecyparis thyoides subsp. henryae (H.L.Li) Little; Chamaecyparis henryae
H.L.Li)[2][3][4] The species grows in forested wetlands where they tend to
dominate the canopy. The trees are associated with a wide variety of other
wetland species because of their wide north-south range. The remaining
populations are now found mostly in remote locations that would be difficult
to harvest, so its popularity as a source of lumber has decreased.

## Contents

  * 1 Distribution and habitat
    * 1.1 Ecology
  * 2 Description
    * 2.1 Subspecies variation
  * 3 Cultivation and uses
    * 3.1 Wood
  * 4 Gallery
  * 5 References

## Distribution and habitat[edit]

Chamaecyparis thyoides grows within 20 and 100 m of the coastline and less
than 50 m above sea level[5] along much of the East Coast and Gulf Coast.[6]
Rare populations grow in the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains, where the
tree may be found up to 460 m above sea level.[2] Nationally, Atlantic white
cedar are protected in the Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge,
Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge, Cape Cod National Seashore, Croatan
National Forest, Francis Marion National Forest, Ocala National Forest, and
Apalachicola National Forest. Altered fire regimes, logging, and draining of
wetlands outside of the few protected areas have all contributed to the
general decrease in the size and occurrences of Atlantic white cedar strands.
The tree is listed as Rare in Georgia and New York, of Special Concern in
Maine, and Extirpated in Pennsylvania.[5][7][8]

Chamaecyparis thyoides lives almost exclusively in freshwater wetlands and are
considered an obligate wetland species. It prefers habitats where the soil is
saturated with water at least during the majority of the growing season. The
soils in these regions have a thick organic layer, often classified as a
histic surface horizon, with sandy material at greater depths and poor
drainage. Atlantic white cedar wetlands are acidic and there is little oxygen
stored in the soil because water has displaced the air. Plants that live in
these environments must be specially adapted to such conditions.

Though the tree is not listed as threatened, Atlantic white cedar wetlands are
considered a globally threatened ecosystem, and often serve as carbon sinks
because of their peat-building abilities.[7][8][9]

### Ecology[edit]

Red maple and black gum trees are often found in the canopy along with
Atlantic white cedar throughout its range. Sphagnum mosses also often grow in
these wetlands.[7][8] The caterpillar of the Hessel's Hairstreak butterfly
feed exclusively on C. thyoides, where its green color helps it to be
camouflaged.[10]

The trees themselves grow on hummocks, small mounds, with water pooling in the
depressions surrounding them. This keeps the tree from being underwater year-
round and helps to protect from floods. The tree benefits from periodic low-
intensity fires which expose seedlings to sunlight and limit competition with
other canopy flora, particularly Red Maple. Too frequent or intense fires or
flooding are damaging to seedlings stored in the top layer of soil and full-
grown trees.[5]

## Description[edit]

Chamaecyparis thyoides is an evergreen coniferous tree usually growing to
20-28 m (but may grow up to 35 m) tall with an average diameter of 0.8 m (2 ft
7 in), up to 2 m (6 ft 7 in), and feathery foliage in moderately flattened
sprays, green to glaucous blue-green in color. The leaves are scale-like, 2-4
mm (3/32-5/32 in) long, and produced in opposite decussate pairs on somewhat
flattened shoots; seedlings up to a year old have needle-like leaves. The tree
is bare of branches for three-fourths of the trunk height and the bark can be
ash-gray to reddish brown. Bark is smooth on juveniles, but mature trees have
deep ridges and bark as thick as 5 cm (2 in). C. thyoides is monoecious, so a
single tree will carry both the pollen and seeds needed for reproduction in
cones. The seed cones are globose, 4-9 mm (5/32-11/32 in) diameter, with 6-10
scales (1-2 seeds per scale), green or purple, maturing to brown in 5-7 months
after pollination. The pollen cones are yellow but turn brown as the tree
matures, 1.5-3 mm (1/16-1/8 in) long and 1-2 mm (1/32-3/32 in) broad,
releasing their yellow pollen once a year in spring.[2][3][7][8] The tree
begins bearing seeds at 4-5 years, but does not reach full maturity and start
producing cones until it is 10-20 year olds. Seeds are dispersed nearly every
year and travel by wind.[11] Height and diameter of the tree increase steadily
until the tree is 50 years old, at which point height growth slows. Both
height and diameter no longer increase once the tree is 100 years old. Stands
are generally all younger than 200 years, though some trees as old as a 1000
years have been reported. Because they have relatively shallow roots, C.
thyoides are vulnerable to being blown over by wind.[5][9]

### Subspecies variation[edit]

  * Chamaecyparis thyoides thyoides: Leaves and immature cones usually glaucous blue-green; cones mature to dark brown-black; facial leaves flat, not ridged, but with visible glands.
  * Chamaecyparis thyoides henryae: Leaves and immature cones green, not glaucous; cones mature to light brown; facial leaves with a longitudinal ridge with glands less obvious or absent.[2][5][8]

## Cultivation and uses[edit]

Foliage and seed cones

Chamaecyparis thyoides is of some importance in horticulture, with several
cultivars of varying crown shape, growth rates and foliage color having been
selected for garden planting. Named cultivars include 'Aurea' (yellow
folliage), 'Heatherbun' (dwarf, purple in winter),[12] 'Andelyensis' (dwarf,
dense foliage), 'Ericoides' (juvenile foliage), and 'Glauca' (strongly
glaucous foliage).[3] In some locations, particularly Mobile County, Alabama,
the tree is cultivated as a Christmas tree.[13]

### Wood[edit]

Its wood is considered hardy, as it is resistant to decay and warping in a
variety of temperatures and moisture levels. The most common use of white
cedar wood is lumber, for which stands usually require 70 years of growth from
germination to harvest. The lumber may be used in house construction, though
scarcity of Atlantic white cedar makes it difficult to be used as the primary
material. The wood was favored for use as roof shingles because it is
lightweight, but has since been replaced by cheaper and more fire-resistant
materials such as asphalt. The durability of the heartwood makes it popular
for use as siding and paneling, and the less resistant sapwood has been used
for interior finishes. White cedar lumber has also been used in boat
construction, but this requires much older, larger trees. North Carolina is
the greatest producer of lumber for boat construction because it has the
greatest number of old-growth C. thyoides forests. Other uses include fencing,
telephone and electric poles, woodenware, duck decoys, lawn furniture, and as
Christmas trees.[13][14]

## Gallery[edit]

  * Chamaecyparis thyoides in bog habitat, Franklin Parker Reserve in New Jersey 

  * Seedling 

  * C. thyoides trunks in Franklin Parker Reserve 

## References[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chamaecyparis thyoides.  
  
  1. ^ Conifer Specialist Group (1998). "Chamaecyparis thyoides". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2006. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 12 May 2006.
  2. ^ a b c d Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4
  3. ^ a b c Rushforth, K. (1987). Conifers. Helm ISBN 0-7470-2801-X.
  4. ^ Mylecraine KA; et al. (2004). "Geographic allozyme variation in Atlantic white-cedar, Chamaecyparis thyoides (Cupresseceae)". Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 34: 2443-2454. doi:10.1139/X04-125.
  5. ^ a b c d e "Plants Profile for Chamaecyparis thyoides". USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service.
  6. ^ "Chamaecyparis thyoides". Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Agricultural Research Service (ARS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Retrieved 12 December 2017.
  7. ^ a b c d Mylecraine KA; et al. (2009). "Rangewide provenance variation in Atlantic white-cedar (Chamaecyparis thyoides): Early survival and growth in New Jersey and North Carolina plantations". Forest Ecology and Management. 216 (1): 91-104. doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2005.05.053.
  8. ^ a b c d e Laderman, AD (1989). "The ecology of the Atlantic white cedar wetlands: a community profile". US Fish and Wildlife Service Biological Report. 85 (7.21).
  9. ^ a b Crawford ER; et al. (2007). "Influence of environment and substrate quality on root decomposition in naturally regenerating and restored Atlantic white cedar wetlands". Wetlands. 27 (1): 1-11. doi:10.1672/0277-5212(2007)27[1:ioeasq]2.0.co;2.
  10. ^ Bright, S; Charny, V; Howell, WM (2013). "Butterflies: new records for Alabama". Journal of the Alabama Academy of Science. 84 (1): 37.
  11. ^ Harlow, William Morehouse (1979). Textbook of Dendrology. McGraw-Hill, Inc. pp. 200-201. ISBN 0-07-026570-4.
  12. ^ Cope, EA; illustrated by Bent King (1986). Native and Cultivated Conifers of Northeastern North America : a guide. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. p. 68\. ISBN 080141721X.
  13. ^ a b Ward, Daniel (1989). "Commercial Utilization of Atlantic white cedar (Chamaecyparis thyoides, Cuppressaceae)". Economic Botany. 43 (3): 386-415. doi:10.1007/bf02858736. JSTOR 4255181.
  14. ^ Peattie, Donald Culross. Trees You Want to Know. Whitman Publishing Company, Racine, Wisconsin, 1934 p31

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Chamaecyparis thyoides

  * Wikidata: Q1744650
  * Wikispecies: Chamaecyparis thyoides
  * Conifers.org: Chamaecyparis_thyoides
  * EoL: 1061745
  * EPPO: CHCTH
  * FNA: 210000241
  * FoC: 210000241
  * GBIF: 2683871
  * GRIN: 10102
  * iNaturalist: 69756
  * IPNI: 54814-2
  * IRMNG: 10880002
  * ITIS: 18046
  * IUCN: 42214
  * NCBI: 187463
  * NZOR: 1dae06a1-58c0-4ab6-aca4-8b92587a8330
  * Plant List: kew-2715316
  * PLANTS: CHTH2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:54814-2
  * Tropicos: 9400245
  * WCSP: 382860

  
  
Cupressus thyoides

  * Wikidata: Q17363881
  * GBIF: 2683878
  * GRIN: 415359
  * IRMNG: 10191211
  * ITIS: 183446
  * Tropicos: 9400075

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chamaecyparis_thyoides&oldid=842543145"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Chamaecyparis
  * Endemic flora of the United States
  * Trees of the Northeastern United States
  * Trees of the Southeastern United States
  * Trees of the United States
  * Least concern flora of the United States

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ?????????
  * Cebuano
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * Italiano
  * Norsk
  * Svenska
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 23 May 2018, at 03:45 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

