# Taxodium distichum

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Taxodium distichum  
Bald cypress forest in a central Mississippi lake  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Taxodium  
Species:  T. distichum  
Binomial name  
Taxodium distichum  
(L.) Rich.  
  
Taxodium distichum (bald cypress,[2] cypress, southern-cypress, white-cypress,
tidewater red-cypress, Gulf-cypress, red-cypress, or swamp cypress) is a
deciduous conifer in the family Cupressaceae that grows on saturated and
seasonally inundated soils in the lowlands of the Southeastern and Gulf
Coastal Plains of the United States.[3][4][5][6]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Gallery
  * 3 Taxonomy
  * 4 Habitat
    * 4.1 Range
    * 4.2 Soils and topography
  * 5 Reproduction and early growth
    * 5.1 Seed production and dissemination
    * 5.2 Seedling development
    * 5.3 Vegetative reproduction
  * 6 Ecology
  * 7 Conservation
  * 8 Cultivation and uses
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

## Description[edit]

Taxodium distichum is a large, slow-growing, and long-lived tree. It typically
grows to heights of 30-35 m (100-120 ft) and to a trunk diameter of 1-2 m (3-6
ft). The main trunks are surrounded by cypress knees. The bark is grayish
brown to reddish brown, thin, and fibrous with a stringy texture; it has a
vertically interwoven pattern of shallow ridges and narrow furrows. The leaves
are alternate and linear, with flat blades borne on the twigs that are
spirally arranged on the stems, but twisted at the base to lie in two
horizontal ranks, 1-2 cm (1/2-3/4 in) long and 1-2 mm (1/32-3/32 in) broad.
Unlike most other species in the family Cupressaceae, it is deciduous, i. e.,
it loses its leaves in winter, hence the appellation of "bald". It is
monoecious \- has both staminate flowers and carpellate flowers on every
plant, with male and female flowers forming on slender, tassel-like structures
near the edge of branchlets. The male and female strobili are produced from
buds formed in late autumn, with pollination in early winter, and mature in
about 12 months. The seed cones are green and mature to grayish brown,
globular, and 2.0-3.5 cm (3/4-1 3/8 in) in diameter. They have from 20 to 30
spirally arranged, four-sided scales, each bearing one, two, or rarely three
triangular seeds. Around 20-40 seeds are in each cone. The cones disintegrate
at maturity to release the large seeds. The seeds are 5-10 mm (3/16-13/32 in)
long, the largest of any species of Cupressaceae, and are produced every year,
with heavy crops every 3-5 years. The seedlings have three to 9, but usually
six, cotyledons each.[3]

The tallest known specimen, near Williamsburg, Virginia, is 44.11 m (145 ft)
tall, and the stoutest known, in the Cat Island National Wildlife Refuge near
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, has a diameter at breast height of 521 cm (17 ft).[5]
The oldest known living specimen, in Bladen County, North Carolina, is over
1,620 years old, rendering it one of the oldest living plants in North
America.[7] Although there are specimens estimated to be nearly 2,000 years
old at Sky Lake in Humphreys County, Mississippi, but precisely determining
age is difficult because the core of older trees have become hollow.[8]

## Gallery[edit]

  * Foliage 

  * Cones 

  * Knees 

  * Bark 

## Taxonomy[edit]

The closely related Taxodium ascendens (pond cypress) is treated by some
botanists as a distinct species,[9][10] while others classify it as merely a
variety of bald cypress,[3][5] as Taxodium distichum var. imbricatum (Nutt.)
Croom. It differs in shorter leaves borne on erect shoots, and in ecology,
being largely confined to low-nutrient blackwater habitats. A few authors also
treat Taxodium mucronatum as a variety of bald cypress, as T. distichum var.
mexicanum Gordon, thereby considering the genus as comprising only one
species.[11]

## Habitat[edit]

Bald cypress in Trap Pond State Park, Delaware

### Range[edit]

Bald cypress range

Bald cypress on the Texas side of Caddo Lake

The native range extends from southeastern New Jersey south to Florida and
west to East Texas and southeastern Oklahoma, and also inland up the
Mississippi River, Ancient bald cypress forests, with some trees more than
1,700 years old, once dominated swamps in the southeast US. Past research has
shown that the range extended north to Delaware, but researchers have found a
natural forest on the Cape May Peninsula in Southeastern New Jersey. The
largest remaining old-growth stands are at Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary, near
Naples, Florida.[citation needed] and in the Three Sisters tract along eastern
North Carolina's Black River. The Corkscrew trees are around 500 years of age
and some exceed 40 m in height. The Black River trees were cored by David
Stahle from the University of Arkansas. He is a dendrochronologist and his
dates range back to 364 AD.[12] In the northern and more inland part of its
range from Delaware and Maryland to Williamsburg, Virginia, it is found in
groups growing in swamps and is accompanied by other hardwoods. In the
southern parts of its range from extreme southeastern Virginia, Virginia Beach
south to Florida and west to Texas, bald cypress can be found growing with
loblolly pine and live oak, and it may be heavily covered in Spanish moss.
This can be observed in the far northern part of its range at First Landing
State Park, Virginia Beach, Virginia. From eastern North Carolina down
throughout Florida and over to southeast and south Texas, bald cypress may be
accompanied in forests by dwarf palmetto (Sabal minor).

It is native to humid climates where annual precipitation ranges from about
760 mm or 30 inches in Texas to 1,630 mm or 64 inches (along the Gulf Coast).
Although it grows best in warm climates, the natural northern limit of the
species is not due to a lack of cold tolerance, but to specific reproductive
requirements; further north, regeneration is prevented by ice damage to
seedlings. Larger trees are able to tolerate much lower temperatures and lower
humidity.

In 2012 scuba divers discovered an underwater forest several miles off the
coast of Mobile, AL in 60 feet of water. The forest contains trees that could
not be dated with radiocarbon methods since they are older than 50,000 years
old, thus most likely lived in the early glacial interval of the last ice age.
The forest contains trees so well-preserved that when they are cut, they still
smell like fresh cypress. The team, which has not yet published their results
in a peer-reviewed journal, is currently studying the site. It is estimated
that they have less than two years before wood-burrowing marine animals
destroy the submerged forest.[13]

### Soils and topography[edit]

Most bald cypress trees grow on flat ground on alluvial soils, usually at
elevations of less than 50 m above sea level, although some stands may occur
at elevations of 500 m in Texas.

Bald cypress occurs mainly along riparian (riverside) wetlands normally
subject to periodic flooding by silt-rich 'brownwater' rivers, unlike the
related Taxodium ascendens, which occurs in silt-poor blackwater rivers and
ponds. T. distichum tolerates minor salinity, but does not grow in brackish or
saline coastal waters.

## Reproduction and early growth[edit]

Foliage in autumn just before shedding

Bald cypress is monoecious. Male and female strobili mature in one growing
season from buds formed the previous year. The male catkins are about 2 mm
(0.079 in) in diameter and are borne in slender, purplish, drooping clusters 7
to 13 cm (2 3/4 to 5 in) long that are conspicuous during the winter on this
deciduous conifer. Pollen is shed in March and April. Female conelets are
found singly or in clusters of two or three. The globose cones turn from green
to brownish-purple as they mature from October to December. The cones are 13
to 36 mm (0.51 to 1.42 in) in diameter and consist of 9 to 15 four-sided
scales that break away irregularly after maturity. Each scale can bear two
irregular, triangular seeds with thick, horny, warty coats and projecting
flanges.[14][15][16][6][17] The number of seeds per cone averages 16 and
ranges from two to 34. Cleaned seeds number from about 5600 to 18,430/kg
(2,540 to 8,360/lb).[6][15][16][17]

### Seed production and dissemination[edit]

Some seeds are produced every year, and good seed crops occur at three- to
five-year intervals.[17] At maturity, the cone scales with their resin-coated
seeds adhering to them, or sometimes entire cones, drop to the water or
ground.[18] This drop of mature seeds is often hastened by squirrels, which
eat bald cypress seeds, but usually drop several scales with undamaged seeds
still attached to each cone they pick.[19] Floodwaters spread the scales or
cones along streams and are the most important means of seed
dissemination.[16]

### Seedling development[edit]

Germination is epigeal.[17] Under swamp conditions, germination generally
takes place on a sphagnum moss or a wet-muck seedbed. Seeds will not germinate
under water, but some will remain viable for 30 months under water. On the
other hand, seeds usually fail to germinate on better drained soils because of
the lack of surface water. Thus, a soil saturated but not flooded for a period
of one to three months after seedfall is required for germination.[16]

Bald cypress swamp and Spanish moss at First Landing State Park in Virginia
Beach, VA

After germination, seedlings must grow fast enough to keep at least part of
their crowns above floodwaters for most of the growing season.[20][21][22]
Bald cypress seedlings can endure partial shading, but require overhead light
for good growth.[23] Seedlings in swamps often reach heights of 20 to 75 cm (8
to 29.5 in) their first year.[24] Growth is checked when a seedling is
completely submerged by flooding, and prolonged submergence kills the
seedling.[16]

In nurseries, Taxodium seeds show an apparent internal dormancy that can be
overcome by various treatments, usually including cold stratification or
submerging in water for 60 days. Nursery beds are sown in spring with
pretreated seeds or in fall with untreated seeds. Seedlings usually reach 75
to 100 cm (29.5 to 39.5 in) in height during their first (and usually only)
year in the nursery. Average size of 1-0 nursery-grown seedlings in a seed
source test including 72 families was 81.4 cm (32.0 in) tall and 1.1 cm (0.43
in) in diameter.

Control of competing vegetation may be necessary for a year or more for bald
cypress planted outside of swamps. Five years after planting on a harrowed and
bedded, poorly drained site in Florida, survival was high, but heights had
increased only 30 cm (12 in), probably because of heavy herbaceous
competition. Seedlings grown in a crawfish pond in Louisiana, where weed
control and soil moisture were excellent through June, averaged 2.9 m (9.5 ft)
and 3.5 cm (1.4 in) diameter at breast height (DBH) after five years. However,
a replicate of the same sources planted on an old soybean field, where weed
control and soil moisture were poor, resulted in the same DBH, but a smaller
average seedling height of 2.1 m (6.9 ft). When planted in a residential yard
and weeded and watered, they averaged 3.7 m (12 ft) tall three years later.

### Vegetative reproduction[edit]

Bald cypress is one of the few conifer species that sprouts. Thrifty sprouts
are generally produced from stumps of young trees, but trees up to 60 years
old also send up healthy sprouts if the trees are cut during the fall or
winter. However, survival of these sprouts is often poor and those that live
are usually poorly shaped and do not make quality sawtimber trees. Stumps of
trees up to 200 years old may also sprout, but the sprouts are not as vigorous
and are more subject to wind damage as the stump decays. In the only report on
the rooting of bald cypress cuttings found in the literature, cuttings from
trees five years old rooted better than those from older trees.

## Ecology[edit]

A bald cypress in the Atchafalaya Basin of Louisiana

Bald cypress knees in duckweed

The seeds remain viable for less than one year, and are dispersed in two ways.
One is by water; the seeds float and move on water until flooding recedes or
the cone is deposited on shore. The second is by wildlife; squirrels eat
seeds, but often drop some scales from the cones they harvest. Seeds do not
germinate under water and rarely germinate on well-drained soils; seedlings
normally become established on continuously saturated, but not flooded, soils
for one to three months. After germination, seedlings must grow quickly to
escape floodwaters; they often reach a height of 20-75 cm (up to 100 cm in
fertilized nursery conditions) in their first year. Seedlings die if inundated
for more than about two to four weeks. Natural regeneration is therefore
prevented on sites that are always flooded during the growing season. Although
vigorous saplings and stump sprouts can produce viable seed, most specimens do
not produce seed until they are about 30 years old. In good conditions, Bald-
cypress grows fairly fast when young, then more slowly with age. Trees have
been measured to reach 3 m in five years, 21 m in 41 years, and 36 m in height
in 96 years; height growth has largely ceased by the time the trees are 200
years old. Some individuals can live over 1,000 years. Determination of the
age of an old tree may be difficult because of frequent missing or false rings
of stemwood caused by variable and stressful growing environments.

Bald cypress forest in winter, showing "knees" and (brown) high flood level,
Lynches River, Johnsonville, South Carolina

Bald cypress trees growing in swamps have a peculiarity of growth called
cypress knees. These are woody projections from the root system project above
the ground or water. Their function was once thought to be to provide oxygen
to the roots, which grow in the low dissolved oxygen (DO) waters typical of a
swamp (as in mangroves). However, evidence for this is scant; in fact, roots
of swamp-dwelling specimens whose knees are removed do not decrease in oxygen
content and the trees continue to thrive. Another more likely function is
structural support and stabilization. Bald cypress trees growing on flood-
prone sites tend to form buttressed bases, but trees grown on drier sites may
lack this feature. Buttressed bases and a strong, intertwined root system
allow them to resist very strong winds; even hurricanes rarely overturn
them.[6]

Many agents damage T. distichum trees. The main damaging (in some cases
lethal) agent is the fungus Stereum taxodii, which causes a brown pocket rot
known as "pecky cypress". It attacks the heartwood of living trees, usually
from the crown down to the roots. A few other fungi attack the sapwood and the
heartwood of the tree, but they do not usually cause serious damage. Insects
such as the cypress flea beetle (Systena marginalis) and the bald cypress
leafroller (Archips goyerana) (closely related to the fruit tree leafroller)
can seriously damage trees by destroying leaves, cones or the bark. Nutrias
also clip and unroot young bald cypress seedlings, sometimes killing a whole
plantation in a short amount of time.[6]

## Conservation[edit]

In 2002, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources identified T distichum as
a state protected plant with the status of Threatened.

## Cultivation and uses[edit]

Timber

The species is a popular ornamental tree that is cultivated for its light,
feathery foliage and orangey brown to dull red autumnal color. In cultivation
it thrives on a wide range of soils, including well drained sites where it
would not grow naturally because juvenile seedlings can not compete with other
vegetation. Cultivation is successful far north of its native range, even to
southern Canada. It is also commonly planted in Europe, Asia, and other
temperate and subtropical locales. It does, however, require hot summers for
good growth. When planted in locales with the cool summers of oceanic
climates, growth is healthy but very slow; some specimens in northeastern
England have only grown to 4-5 m tall in circa 50 years[25] and do not produce
cones. One of the oldest specimens in Europe was planted in the 1900s in the
Arboretum de Pezanin in Burgundy, France.

Bald cypress has great merchantable yields. In virgin stands, yields from
112-196 m3/ha were common, and some stands may have exceeded 1000 m3/ha. Bald
cypress swamps are some of the world's most productive ecosystems.

The odorless wood, which closely resembles that of other Cupressus species,
has long been valued for its resistance to water, and thus is denominated
"wood eternal". Still usable, prehistoric wood is often found in swamps as far
north as New Jersey, and occasionally as far north as Connecticut, although it
is more common in the southeastern states. The somewhat mineralized wood is
harvested from some swamps in the southeastern states, and is greatly prized
for special uses such as for carvings. The fungus Stereum taxodii causes a
specific form of the wood that is denominated "Pecky cypress", which is used
for decorative wall paneling.

The bald cypress was designated the official state tree of Louisiana in
1963.[26] Some consider it to be a symbol of the southern swamps of the United
States.

Shingles can be fashioned from bald cypress. Joshua D. Brown, the first
settler of Kerrville, Texas, made his living producing shingles from bald
cypress trees that grew along the Guadalupe River of the Texas Hill
Country.[27] Shingles produced from bald cypress were also one of the primary
industries for early pioneers in Kissimmee, Florida, where one of the primary
bodies of water, Shingle Creek, was named in honor of this industry's
importance to the growth of the city.[28]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Taxodium distichum". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42261A2967873. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42261A2967873.en. Retrieved 14 December 2017.
  2. ^ "Taxodium distichum". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA. Retrieved 8 December 2015.
  3. ^ a b c Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4
  4. ^ Watson, Frank D. (1993). "Taxodium distichum". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  5. ^ a b c Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Taxodium distichum subsp. distichum". The Gymnosperm Database.
  6. ^ a b c d e Wilhite, L. P.; Toliver, J. R. (1990). "Taxodium distichum". In Burns, Russell M.; Honkala, Barbara H. Conifers. Silvics of North America. Washington, D.C.: United States Forest Service (USFS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1 - via Southern Research Station (www.srs.fs.fed.us).
  7. ^ http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/~adk/oldlisteast/Spp/TADI.html
  8. ^ "The Sky Lake Boardwalk" (PDF). Wild Life Mississippi. Fall 2011.
  9. ^ "Taxodium distichum". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA.
  10. ^ "Taxodium ascendens". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA.
  11. ^ Watson, Frank D. (1993). "Taxodium". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  12. ^ Paul Ferguson (2008). "Searching for Methuselah" (PDF). Pocosin Press. pp. 1-3. Retrieved 21 April 2011.
  13. ^ "Primeval Underwater Forest Discovered in Gulf of Mexico". Live Science. Retrieved 11 July 2013.
  14. ^ Faulkner, Stephen P. 1982. Genetic variation of cones, seed and nursery-grown seedlings of baldcypress [Taxodium distichum (L.) Rich.] provenances. M.S. Thesis, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge. 71 p.
  15. ^ a b Radford, Albert E., Harry E. Ahles, and C. Ritchie Bell. 1968. Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill. 1183 p.
  16. ^ a b c d e U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1965. Silvics of forest trees of the United States. H. A. Fowells, comp. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook 271. Washington, DC. 762 p.
  17. ^ a b c d U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 1974. Seeds of woody plants in the United States. C. S. Schopmeyer, tech. coord. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Handbook 450. Washington, DC. 883 p.
  18. ^ Stubbs, Jack. 1983. Personal communication. USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station, Clemson, SC.
  19. ^ Brunswig, Norman L. 1983. Personal communication. National Audubon Society, Francis Beidler Forest, Harleyville, SC.
  20. ^ Conner, William H, 1988, Natural and artificial regeneration of baldcypress [Taxodium distichum (L.) Rich.] in the Barataria and Lake Verret basins of Louisiana. Ph.D. Dissertation, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge. 148 p.
  21. ^ Conner, William H., and John R. Toliver. 1987. Vexar seedling protectors did not reduce nutria damage to planted baldcypress seedlings. USDA Forest Service, Tree Planter's Notes 38(3):26-29.
  22. ^ Conner, William H., John R. Toliver, and Fred H. Sklar. 1986. Natural regeneration of baldcypress [Taxodium distichum (L.) Rich.] in a Louisiana swamp. Forest Ecology and Management 14:305-317.
  23. ^ Williston, H. L., F. W. Shropshire, and W. E. Balmer. 1980. Cypress management: a forgotten opportunity. USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Area State and Private Forestry, Forestry Report SA-FR-8. Atlanta, GA. 8 p.
  24. ^ Bull, H. 1949. Cypress planting in southern Louisiana. Southern Lumberman 179(2249):227-230.
  25. ^ Tree Register of the British Isles
  26. ^ Calhoun, Milburn; Frois, Jeanne (31 May 2006). Louisiana Almanac, 2006-2007 (17th ed.). Pelican Publishing. p. 431\. ISBN 978-1-58980-307-7.
  27. ^ Texas Historical Commission, historical marker in Kerrville, Texas, 1971.
  28. ^ http://osceola.ifas.ufl.edu/pdfs/Natural%20Resources/Shingle%20Creek_Brochure_2013_final.pdf

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to  
Taxodium distichum.  
Wikispecies has information related to Taxodium distichum  
  
  * The Ancient Bald Cypress Consortium
  * Images of bald-cypress trees and swamps
  * Interactive Distribution Map for Taxodium distichum
  * Photos of remarkable bald-cypress trees worldwide
  * Taxodium distichum \- information, genetic conservation units and related resources. European Forest Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN)

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Taxodium distichum

  * Wikidata: Q148950
  * Wikispecies: Taxodium distichum
  * ARKive: taxodium-distichum
  * EoL: 1061709
  * EPPO: TADDI
  * FNA: 200005404
  * FoC: 200005404
  * GBIF: 2684191
  * GRIN: 80066
  * iNaturalist: 49666
  * IPNI: 30052311-2
  * IRMNG: 11074053
  * ITIS: 18041
  * IUCN: 42261
  * NBN: NBNSYS0000033999
  * NCBI: 28982
  * NZOR: d42344d8-b681-42fd-8d61-01945eb10822
  * PfaF: Taxodium distichum
  * Plantarium: 46689
  * Plant List: kew-2434119
  * PLANTS: TADI2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:30052311-2
  * Tropicos: 31300230
  * WCSP: 378596

  
  
Cupressus disticha

  * Wikidata: Q17363915
  * GBIF: 2684210
  * GRIN: 12645
  * IRMNG: 11155647
  * ITIS: 183431
  * Tropicos: 9400133

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taxodium_distichum&oldid=849974571"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Taxodium
  * Trees of the Eastern United States
  * Trees of the Southeastern United States
  * Trees of the South-Central United States
  * Plants used in bonsai
  * Ornamental trees
  * Least concern plants
  * Trees of the North-Central United States
  * Trees of the Southern United States

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from September 2007
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms
  * Use dmy dates from May 2011

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * ?????????
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Eesti
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Italiano
  * Latviesu
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * ???????
  * ?????? / srpski
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 12 July 2018, at 18:03 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

