# Thuja occidentalis

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear
because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this
article by introducing more precise citations. (September 2016) (Learn how and
when to remove this template message)  
  
Northern white-cedar  
Leaves and immature cones  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Thuja  
Species:  T. occidentalis  
Binomial name  
Thuja occidentalis  
L.  
Natural range  
  
Thuja occidentalis, also known as northern white-cedar or eastern arborvitae,
is an evergreen coniferous tree, in the cypress family Cupressaceae, which is
native to eastern Canada and much of the north, central and upper Northeastern
United States,[2][3] but widely cultivated as an ornamental plant. The species
was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, and the binomial name remains
current.

## Contents

  * 1 Common names
  * 2 Description
  * 3 Distribution
  * 4 Ecology
  * 5 Uses
  * 6 Cultivation
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 External links

## Common names[edit]

Common names include:

  * northern white-cedar or whitecedar[3]
  * eastern white-cedar or whitecedar[3]
  * white cedar

  * swamp cedar[2]
  * false white cedar

  * arborvitae[2]
  * American arborvitae[3]
  * eastern arborvitae[3]

  
  
The name arborvitae is particularly used in the horticultural trade in the
United States. It is Latin for "tree of life" - due to the supposed medicinal
properties of the sap, bark and twigs.[4] Despite its common names, it is not
a true cedar in the genus Cedrus, nor is it related to the Australian white
cedar, Melia azedarach.

## Description[edit]

Trunk

Unlike the closely related western red-cedar (Thuja plicata), northern white-
cedar is only a small or medium-sized tree, growing to a height of 15 m (49
ft) tall with a 0.9 m (3.0 ft) trunk diameter, exceptionally to 38 metres (125
ft) tall and 1.8 metres (5.9 ft) diameter.[5] The tree is often stunted or
prostrate in less favorable locations. The bark is red-brown, furrowed and
peels in narrow, longitudinal strips.

Northern white-cedar has fan-like branches and scaly leaves. The foliage forms
in flat sprays with scale-like leaves 3-5 millimetres (1/8-3/16 in) long.

The seed cones are slender, yellow-green, ripening to brown, 9-14 millimetres
(3/8-9/16 in) long and 4-5 millimetres (5/32-3/16 in) broad,[citation needed]
with 6-8 overlapping scales. They contain about 8 seeds each.[5] The branches
may take root if the tree falls.[3]

## Distribution[edit]

Northern white-cedar is native to an area in the southern part of eastern
Canada and the adjacent part of the northern United States. It extends from
southeastern Manitoba east throughout the Great Lakes region and into Ontario,
Quebec, New York, Vermont, New Hampshire, Maine, Prince Edward Island, New
Brunswick, and Nova Scotia. There are isolated populations in west-central
Manitoba, and to the south in Massachusetts, Connecticut, Ohio, and Illinois
and in the Appalachian Mountains of Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia.[3] In Canada, its range
reaches the Arctic treeline and the southern tip of Hudson Bay. It grows
mainly in places with cooler summers, with an average temperature of 16 to 22
?C (61 to 72 ?F) in July, and a shorter growing season, from 90 to 180
days.[6]

## Ecology[edit]

A swamp along the Superior Hiking Trail in November with white-cedars (left)
and other trees and shrubs

Northern white-cedar grows naturally in wet forests, being particularly
abundant in coniferous swamps where other larger and faster-growing trees
cannot compete successfully. It also occurs on other sites with reduced tree
competition, such as cliffs. Although not currently listed as endangered, wild
white-cedar populations are threatened in many areas by high deer numbers;
deer find the soft evergreen foliage a very attractive winter food, and strip
it rapidly. The largest known specimen is 34 m (112 ft) tall and 175 cm (69
in) diameter, on South Manitou Island within Leelanau County, Michigan.

Northern white-cedar can be a very long-lived tree in certain conditions, with
notably old specimens growing on cliffs where they are inaccessible to deer
and wildfire; the oldest known living specimen is[when?] just over 1,100 years
old, but a dead specimen with over 1,650 growth rings has been found.[7]
Despite their age, these very old trees are small and stunted due to the
difficult growing conditions. The Witch Tree, a T. occidentalis growing out of
a cliff face on Lake Superior in Minnesota, was described by the French
explorer Sieur de la Verendrye as being a mature tree in 1731; it is still
alive today.

Old trees growing on a rock ledge in Potawatomi State Park, Wisconsin

White-cedar specimens found growing on cliff faces in southern Ontario are the
oldest trees in Eastern North America and all of Canada, growing to ages in
excess of 1,653 years.[3]

## Uses[edit]

White-cedar is a tree with important uses in traditional Ojibwe culture.
Honored with the name Nookomis Giizhik ("Grandmother Cedar"), the tree is the
subject of sacred legends and is considered a gift to humanity for its myriad
uses, among them crafts, construction, and medicine.[8] It is one of the four
plants of the Ojibwe medicine wheel, associated with the north. White-cedar
foliage is rich in Vitamin C and is believed to be the annedda which cured the
scurvy of Jacques Cartier and his party in the winter of 1535-1536.[6] Due to
the presence of the neurotoxic compound thujone, internal use can be harmful
if used for prolonged periods or while pregnant.

Northern white-cedar is commercially used for rustic fencing and posts,
lumber, poles, shingles and in the construction of log cabins.[6] White-cedar
is the preferred wood for the structural elements, such as ribs and planking,
of birchbark canoes and the planking of wooden canoes.[9]

The essential oil within the plant has been used for cleansers, disinfectants,
hair preparations, insecticides, liniment, room sprays, and soft soaps. There
are some reports that the Ojibwa made a soup from the inner bark of the soft
twigs. Others have used the twigs to make teas to relieve constipation and
headache.[9]

In the 19th century, T. occidentalis extract was in common use as an
externally applied tincture or ointment for the treatment of warts, ringworm,
and thrush.[10] "An injection of the tincture into venereal warts is said to
cause them to disappear."[11]

Strips of clear, northern white-cedar wood were used to make the original Au
Sable river boats, formerly known as the "pickup trucks of the Au Sable". The
light, rot resistant wood was preferred but is now commonly replaced by marine
grade plywood. Since the plywood is available in lengths of 8 feet, the modern
boats are slightly shorter than the older boats which were around 25 feet
long.

## Cultivation[edit]

A grove of a columnar ornamental variety in Powsin Botanical Garden, Warsaw,
Poland

Northern white-cedar, often under the name arborvitae, is widely used as an
ornamental tree, particularly for screens and hedges, in gardens, parks and
cemeteries. Over 300 cultivars exist, showing great variation in colour, shape
and size, with some of the more common ones being: 'Degroot's Spire',
'Ellwangeriana', 'Hetz Wintergreen', 'Lutea', 'Rheingold', 'Smaragd' (a.k.a.
'Emerald Green'), 'Techny', and 'Wareana'. It was introduced into Europe as
early as 1540.

The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of
Garden Merit:-

  * 'Danica'[12]
  * 'Holmstrup'[13]

  * 'Rheingold'[14]
  * 'Smaragd'[15]

  
  
## See also[edit]

  * Cedar wood

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Thuja occidentalis". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42262A2967995. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42262A2967995.en. Retrieved 14 December 2017.
  2. ^ a b c "Thuja occidentalis". Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). Agricultural Research Service (ARS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
  3. ^ a b c d e f g h Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Thuja occidentalis". The Gymnosperm Database.
  4. ^ Thuja, American Cancer Society, last revised 6/19/2007. available online
  5. ^ a b Chambers, Kenton L. (1993). "Thuja occidentalis". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee. Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). 2. New York and Oxford. Retrieved 24 September 2016 - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link) 
  6. ^ a b c Johnston, William F. (1990). "Thuja occidentalis". In Burns, Russell M.; Honkala, Barbara H. Conifers. Silvics of North America. Washington, D.C.: United States Forest Service (USFS), United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 1 - via Southern Research Station (www.srs.fs.fed.us).
  7. ^ "Eastern OLDLIST a database of ancient trees and their ages". Rocky Mountain Tree-Ring Research, Inc. & Eastern Kentucky University. 2008. Retrieved 22 August 2013.
  8. ^ Geniusz, Wendy Makoons (2009). Our Knowledge is not Primitive. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press
  9. ^ a b "USDA/NRCS Plant Guide: Northern White Cedar, Thuja occidentalis L" (PDF). United States Department of Agriculture. Retrieved 2008-02-15.
  10. ^ David Hoffmann, Medical Herbalism: Principles and Practices, Healing Arts Press, 2003, p.588
  11. ^ M Grieve, A Modern Herbal, London: Jonathan Cape, 1931, p.177
  12. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja occidentalis 'Danica'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.
  13. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja occidentalis 'Holmstrup'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.
  14. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja occidentalis 'Rheingold'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.
  15. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Thuja occidentalis 'Smaragd'". Retrieved 6 June 2013.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thuja occidentalis.  
  
  * University of Michigan at Dearborn: Native American Ethnobotany of Thuja occidentalis
  * Borealforest.org: Thuja occidentalis

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q147468
  * Wikispecies: Thuja occidentalis
  * ARKive: thuja-occidentalis
  * EoL: 1034927
  * EPPO: THUOC
  * FNA: 200005456
  * FoC: 200005456
  * GBIF: 2684178
  * GRIN: 36584
  * iNaturalist: 54037
  * IPNI: 263956-1
  * IRMNG: 10858537
  * ITIS: 505490
  * IUCN: 42262
  * NBN: NBNSYS0000042213
  * NCBI: 3317
  * NZOR: 4ce0c2e2-6adc-4008-857e-75897d6e4bd2
  * Plant List: kew-2432938
  * PLANTS: THOC2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:263956-1
  * Tropicos: 9400130
  * VASCAN: 4711
  * WCSP: 378542

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thuja_occidentalis&oldid=849764699"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Thuja
  * Trees of Eastern Canada
  * Trees of the Eastern United States
  * Trees of the Northeastern United States
  * Trees of the Southeastern United States
  * Trees of the Great Lakes region (North America)
  * Trees of Ontario
  * Trees of humid continental climate
  * Plants described in 1753
  * Taxa named by Carl Linnaeus
  * Garden plants of North America
  * Ornamental trees
  * Medicinal plants of North America
  * Plants used in traditional Native American medicine
  * Least concern flora of the United States
  * Trees of the North-Central United States

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter
  * Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2016
  * All articles lacking in-text citations
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016
  * All articles with vague or ambiguous time
  * Vague or ambiguous time from August 2016
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Asturianu
  * Atikamekw
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Brezhoneg
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Eesti
  * ????????
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * Lietuviu
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * Norsk nynorsk
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Slovencina
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Turkce
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * Zemaiteska
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 11 July 2018, at 05:42 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

