# Athrotaxis cupressoides

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Athrotaxis cupressoides  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Vulnerable (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Athrotaxis  
Species:  A. cupressoides  
Binomial name  
Athrotaxis cupressoides  
D.Don  
  
Athrotaxis cupressoides, is also known as pencil pine, despite being a species
of the Cupressaceae family, and not a member of the pine family.[2] Found as
either an erect shrub or tree, this species is endemic to Tasmania Australia.
Trees can live for upwards of 1000 years, sustaining a very slow growth rate
of approximately 12 mm in diameter per year.[3]

As with all species in the Athrotaxis genus, A. cupressoides' leaves are
single-veined and arranged in spirals. Unique to A. cupressoides the leaves
are 2-3mm long/wide, overlapping and closely compressed stem.[4] This results
in a scale like appearance. Two forms of woody cones act as the gametophyte
structures, which mature approximately six months after pollination and are
typically retained on the tree for up to one year. The female cones are
spherical with pointed bract scales 12-15 mm in diameter. The male cones are
much smaller 3-5 mm in diameter. The common name pencil pine is based on it
being an evergreen conical-shaped tree which grows up to 20m, with trunks up
to 1.5m in diameter.[5] This shape is most prominent when found in subalpine
or open alpine vegetation, however it can also occur as a rainforest tree.
Bark is light brown and fibrous, becoming more furrowed with age.[6][7]

The name Athrotaxis is derived from the Greek words athros meaning crowded and
taxis meaning arrangement. The species name cupressoides in Greek means
'resembling cypress'.[3]

## Contents

  * 1 Distribution and Habitat
  * 2 Threats
  * 3 Taxonomy
  * 4 Uses and cultivation
  * 5 References

## Distribution and Habitat[edit]

The spiral leaf arrangement

Athrotaxis cupressoides is an endemic native to Tasmania, Australia. Is
distribution is primarily in the central and western mountain areas between
700 and 1300m above sea level, often around tarns or damp depressions on peaty
or wet-rocky soils. Locations at which you may observe A. cupressoides
include; the Central Plateau, the Great Western Tier, Mt. Field National Park,
the westward mountains such as Cradle Mountain and scattered on the south of
the island.[8]

Typically Athrotaxis cupressoides are found in subalpine or open alpine
vegetation. When found in montane rainforests (also known as cool temperate
rainforests) A. cupressoides dominates.[9] These environments are typically
composed of; a canopy containing Athrotaxis cupressoides, and Athrotaxis
selaginoides (king billy pine), an understory containing Nothofagus
cunninghamii (myrtle beech) and Phyllocladus aspleniifolius (celery-top pine),
a shrub layer containing Olearia pinifolius (prickly daisybush) and Richea
species, and a ground covering of Astelia alpine (pineapple grass), Empodisma
minus (spreading rope rush) and Gleichenia alpine (alpine coral fern).[9][10]

In regions where both A. cupressoides and A. selaginoides grow a third hybrid
species can occasionally be found. These two species are so closely related
they form the hybrid Athrotaxis x laxifolia[5].

## Threats[edit]

Snag of Athrotaxis cupressoides 30-40 years after a bush fire

Athrotaxis cupressoides is a highly fire sensitive species, hence why the
oldest and most vigorous populations are located in damp regions.[11] Major
fires at the Walls of Jerusalem National Park and the Central Plateau
Conservation Area during the summer of 1960 - 1961, and again in 2016,
severely affected and reduced the population.[12] The species' poor adaption
to fire and the added stress of regeneration being hampered by grazing animals
makes recovery from these incidents difficult. Animals such as sheep, rabbits
and native marsupial mammals, have been observed to eat the seedlings, suckers
and adult foliage leaving significant impact on the plants.[2]

Signs of die back have also been associated with disease caused by an
introduced strain of Phytophthora[8].

## Taxonomy[edit]

Athrotaxis cupressoides was previously under the family Taxodiaceae, which has
now been merged with Cupressaceae.[13]

## Uses and cultivation[edit]

Athrotaxis cupressoides currently has no recorded uses. The trunks are gnarled
and unsuitable for uses as timber.[8] The species is however occasionally
grown and sold as an ornamental.[8]

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Conifer Specialist Group 2000: Athrotaxis cupressoides
  2. ^ a b "Conifer Species: Athrotaxis cupressoides | American Conifer Society". American Conifer Society. Retrieved 2018-03-09.
  3. ^ a b Education Service - Australian National Botanic Gardens. "Australian Conifers". www.anbg.gov.au. Retrieved 2018-03-09.
  4. ^ Wiltshire, Rob; Jordan, Greg (2009). Tree Flip. School of Plant Science, University of Tasmania & CRC for Forestry.
  5. ^ a b "Key to Tasmanian Dicots". www.utas.edu.au. Retrieved 2018-03-09.
  6. ^ "Athrotaxis cupressoides (Pencil pine) description". www.conifers.org. Retrieved 2018-03-09.
  7. ^ Simmons, Marion H.; Wapstra, Hans; Wapstra, Annie (2008). A guide to flowers & plants of Tasmania (4th ed.). Chatswood, N.S.W.: Reed New Holland. ISBN 9781877069475. OCLC 225635307.
  8. ^ a b c d "Athrotaxis cupressoides (Pencil Pine)". www.iucnredlist.org. Retrieved 2018-03-09.
  9. ^ a b "Rainforest | Sustainable Timbers Tasmania". www.sttas.com.au. Retrieved 2018-03-09.
  10. ^ Tasmanian Vegetation Monitoring and Mapping Program, Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment (2016). "RPP Athrotaxis cupressoides rainforest: grassy facies" (PDF).
  11. ^ Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment (2010). "Endemic Conifers of Tasmania". CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) 
  12. ^ Johnson, K. A.; Marsden-Smedley, J. B. (2002). "FIRE HISTORY OF THE NORTHERN PART OF THE TASMANIAN WILDERNESS WORLD HERITAGE AREA AND ITS ASSOCIATED REGIONS" (PDF). Papers and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Tasmania. 136.
  13. ^ Chrtek, Jindrich; Pergl, Jan (2013-06-01). "Book Reviews". Folia Geobotanica. 48 (2): 285-296. doi:10.1007/s12224-013-9160-6. ISSN 1211-9520.

Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q245878
  * Wikispecies: Athrotaxis cupressoides
  * ARKive: athrotaxis-cupressoides
  * Conifers.org: Athrotaxis_cupressoides
  * EoL: 1034892
  * EPPO: ATSCU
  * GBIF: 2684870
  * GRIN: 5972
  * iNaturalist: 136278
  * IPNI: 261711-1
  * IUCN: 32054
  * NCBI: 99817
  * NZOR: 4257a3b3-e415-41f5-abf5-766f47d95167
  * Plant List: kew-2664826
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:261711-1
  * WCSP: 382223

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Athrotaxis_cupressoides&oldid=851595476"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List vulnerable species
  * Cupressaceae
  * Endemic flora of Tasmania
  * Pinales of Australia
  * Trees of Australia
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Ornamental trees
  * Vulnerable flora of Australia

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonomy articles created by Polbot

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * ?????
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 23 July 2018, at 10:37 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

