# Juniperus oxycedrus

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For another "cedar" native to Iran, see Cupressus sempervirens

Juniperus oxycedrus  
Cade in southern France  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Juniperus  
Species:  J. oxycedrus  
Binomial name  
Juniperus oxycedrus  
L.  
Natural range  
Synonyms[2]  
  
  * Juniperus glauca Salisb. nom. illeg.
  * Juniperus heterocarpa Timb.-Lagr. ex Loret & Barrandon
  * Juniperus heterocarpa Timb.-Lagr. ex Nyman
  * Juniperus oxycedrina St.-Lag.
  * Juniperus rufescens Link nom. illeg.
  * Juniperus souliei Sennen
  * Juniperus tenella Antoine
  * Juniperus tremolsii Pau
  * Juniperus wittmanniana Fisch. ex Lindl. nom. inval.
  * Oxycedrus echinoformis Carriere
  * Oxycedrus ericoides Pandiani
  * Oxycedrus withmanniana Carriere

  
  
Juniperus oxycedrus, vernacularly called Cade, cade juniper, prickly juniper,
prickly cedar, or sharp cedar, is a species of juniper, native across the
Mediterranean region from Morocco and Portugal, north to southern France, east
to westernmost Iran, and south to Lebanon and Israel, growing on a variety of
rocky sites from sea level up to 1600 m elevation.[3][4] The specific epithet
oxycedrus means "sharp cedar" and this species may have been the original
cedar or cedrus of the ancient Greeks.[5]

## Contents

  * 1 Description
    * 1.1 Subspecies
  * 2 Uses
  * 3 References
  * 4 External links

## Description[edit]

J. oxycedrus is very variable in shape, forming a spreading shrub 2-3 m
(6.6-9.8 ft) tall to a small erect tree 10-15 m (33-49 ft) tall. It has
needle-like leaves in whorls of three; the leaves are green, 5-20 mm
(0.20-0.79 in) long and 1-2 mm (0.039-0.079 in) broad, with a double white
stomatal band (split by a green midrib) on the inner surface. It is usually
dioecious, with separate male and female plants. The seed cones are berry-
like, green ripening in 18 months to orange-red with a variable pink waxy
coating; they are spherical, 7-12 mm (0.28-0.47 in) diameter, and have three
or six fused scales in 1-2 whorls, three of the scales with a single seed. The
seeds are dispersed when birds eat the cones, digesting the fleshy scales and
passing the hard seeds in their droppings. The pollen cones are yellow, 2-3 mm
(0.079-0.118 in) long, and fall soon after shedding their pollen in late
winter or early spring.[3][6][7]

As to be expected from the wide range, J. oxycedrus is very variable. One
recent study[6][8][9] splits it into three species, though other
authorities[3] do not accept this:

  * Juniperus oxycedrus L. - Western prickly juniper. Southwest Europe, in eastern Portugal and Spain east to southern France, northwest Italy, Corsica, and Sardinia, and northwest Africa from Morocco east to Tunisia. Leaves long (10-20 mm (0.39-0.79 in)), narrow-based; cones smooth.
  * Juniperus navicularis Gand. (syn. J. oxycedrus subsp. transtagana) - Portuguese prickly juniper. Coastal southwest Portugal. Leaves short (5-12 mm (0.20-0.47 in)); cones smooth.
  * Juniperus deltoides R.P.Adams - Eastern prickly juniper. Central Italy east to Iran and Israel. Leaves long (10-20 mm (0.39-0.79 in)), broad-based; cones with raised scale edges.

### Subspecies[edit]

An additional variety or subspecies J. oxycedrus var. badia H.Gay (syn. J.
oxycedrus subsp. badia (H.Gay) Debeaux) is distinguished on the basis of
larger cones (10-13 mm (0.39-0.51 in) diameter), tinged purple when mature; it
is described from northern Algeria, and also reported from Portugal and
Spain.[3][6]

A further species Juniperus macrocarpa,[6] confined to Mediterranean coastal
sands, is more distinct but has also often been treated as a subspecies of
Prickly Juniper, as J. oxycedrus subsp. macrocarpa;[3] it differs in the
broader leaves 2-3 mm (0.079-0.118 in) wide, and larger cones 12-18 mm
(0.47-0.71 in) diameter.

Other close relatives of J. oxycedrus include Juniperus brevifolia on the
Azores, Juniperus cedrus on the Canary Islands and Juniperus formosana in
eastern Asia.[3][6]

## Uses[edit]

Cade oil is the essential oil obtained through destructive distillation of the
wood of this shrub. It is a dark, aromatic oil with a strong smoky smell which
is used in some cosmetics and (traditional) skin treatment drugs, as well as
incense.[10][11]

  * Leaves and mature cones, Catalonia 

  * Leaves and immature cones, southern France 

  * Central Spain 

  * Bark, Central Spain 

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Juniperus oxycedrus". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42243A2965838. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42243A2965838.en. Retrieved 15 December 2017.
  2. ^ The Plant List: A Working List of All Plant Species, retrieved 11 February 2017
  3. ^ a b c d e f Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4
  4. ^ Conifer Specialist Group (1998). "Juniperus oxycedrus". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2006. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 12 May 2006.
  5. ^ Meiggs, R. 1982. Trees and Timber in the Ancient Mediterranean World.
  6. ^ a b c d e Adams, R. P. (2004). Junipers of the World. Trafford. ISBN 1-4120-4250-X
  7. ^ Arboretum de Villardebelle: photos of cones and shoots
  8. ^ Adams, R. P. (2000). Systematics of Juniperus section Juniperus based on leaf essential oils and RAPD DNA fingerprinting. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 28: 515-528 available online (pdf file) Archived 2006-03-18 at the Wayback Machine.
  9. ^ Adams, R. P. (2004). Juniperus deltoides, a new species and nomenclatural notes on Juniperus polycarpos and J. turcomanica (Cupressaceae). Phytologia 86: 49 - 53 available online (pdf file) Archived 2006-03-18 at the Wayback Machine.
  10. ^ 1911 British Pharmacopaea: Cade Oil
  11. ^ 1918 US Dispensatory: Cade Oil

## External links[edit]

  * Trees portal

  * Juniperus oxycedrus \- information, genetic conservation units and related resources. European Forest Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN)

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juniperus oxycedrus.  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q184300
  * Wikispecies: Juniperus oxycedrus
  * APDB: 131007
  * EoL: 1061669
  * EPPO: IUPOO
  * GBIF: 2684451
  * GRIN: 20851
  * iNaturalist: 133994
  * IPNI: 262299-1
  * ITIS: 822545
  * IUCN: 42243
  * NCBI: 69008
  * NZOR: 1ee99389-1397-480b-b518-43909a115156
  * PfaF: Juniperus oxycedrus
  * Plant List: kew-2332702
  * PLANTS: JUOX2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:262299-1
  * Tropicos: 9400108
  * WCSP: 377576
  * WOI: 1878

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juniperus_oxycedrus&oldid=851711217"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Juniperus
  * Flora of the Mediterranean
  * Flora of Europe
  * Flora of North Africa
  * Flora of the Middle East
  * Flora of Western Asia
  * Trees of Mediterranean climate
  * Least concern plants
  * Plants described in 1753
  * Taxa named by Carl Linnaeus

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Aragones
  * Asturianu
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * Occitan
  * ??????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 24 July 2018, at 03:09 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

