# Cryptomeria

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Cryptomeria japonica)

Jump to navigation Jump to search

"Sugi" redirects here. For other uses, see Sugi (disambiguation).

For other uses, see Cryptomeria (disambiguation).

Cryptomeria  
Plate from "Flora Japonica" by Philipp Franz von Siebold and Joseph Gerhard
Zuccarini  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Near Threatened (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Subfamily: Taxodioideae  
Genus: Cryptomeria  
D.Don  
Species:  C. japonica  
Binomial name  
Cryptomeria japonica  
(L.f.) D.Don  
Synonyms  
  
  * Cryptomeria araucarioides Henkel & W.Hochst.
  * Cryptomeria compacta Beissn.
  * Cryptomeria elegans Jacob-Makoy
  * Cryptomeria fortunei Hooibr. ex Billain
  * Cryptomeria generalis E.H.L.Krause 
  * Cryptomeria kawaii Hayata
  * Cryptomeria lobbiana Billain
  * Cryptomeria lobbii (Carriere) Lavallee
  * Cryptomeria mairei (H.Lev.) Nakai
  * Cryptomeria mucronata Beissn.
  * Cryptomeria nana Lindl. & Gordon
  * Cryptomeria nigricans Carriere
  * Cryptomeria pungens Beissn.
  * Cryptomeria variegata Beissn.
  * Cryptomeria viridis Beissn.
  * Cupressus japonica Thunb. ex L.f.
  * Cupressus mairei H.Lev.
  * Schubertia japonica (Thunb. ex L.f.) Jacques
  * Schubertia japonicum (Thunb. ex L. f.) Brongn.
  * Taxodium japonicum (Thunb. ex L.f.) Brongn.

  
  
Plank cut from Cryptomeria japonica

Cryptomeria (literally "hidden parts") is a monotypic genus of conifer in the
cypress family Cupressaceae, formerly belonging to the family Taxodiaceae. It
includes only one species, Cryptomeria japonica (syn. Cupressus japonica
L.f.). It is endemic to Japan, where it is known as sugi (Japanese: ?).[2] The
tree is called Japanese sugi pine[3] or Japanese red-cedar[4] in English.

Cone and seed

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Endemism
  * 3 Biology
  * 4 Fossil record
  * 5 Cultivation
    * 5.1 Timber
      * 5.1.1 Mechanical properties
    * 5.2 Ornamental
  * 6 Symbolism
  * 7 See also
  * 8 References
  * 9 Further reading
  * 10 External links

## Description[edit]

Cryptomeria japonica: (left) shoot with mature cones and immature male cones
at top; (centre) adult foliage shoot; (right) juvenile foliage shoot

It is a very large evergreen tree, reaching up to 70 m (230 ft) tall and 4 m
(13 ft) trunk diameter, with red-brown bark which peels in vertical strips.
The leaves are arranged spirally, needle-like, 0.5-1 cm (1/4-3/8 in) long; and
the seed cones globular, 1-2 cm (1/2-3/4 in) diameter with about 20-40 scales.
It is superficially similar to the related giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron
giganteum), from which it can be differentiated by the longer leaves (under
0.5 cm or 1/4 in in the giant sequoia) and smaller cones (4-6 cm or 1 1/2-2
1/4 in in the giant sequoia), and the harder bark on the trunk (thick, soft
and spongy in giant sequoia).

## Endemism[edit]

Sugi has been cultivated in China for so long that it is frequently thought to
be native there. Forms selected for ornament and timber production long ago in
China have been described as a distinct variety Cryptomeria japonica var.
sinensis (or even a distinct species, Cryptomeria fortunei), but they do not
differ from the full range of variation found in the wild in Japan, and there
is no definite evidence the species ever occurred wild in China. Genetic
analysis of the most famous Chinese population of Cryptomeria japonica var.
sinensis on Tianmu Mountain, containing trees estimated to be nearly 1000
years old, supports the hypothesis that the population originates from an
introduction.[5]

## Biology[edit]

Cryptomeria grow in forests on deep, well-drained soils subject to warm, moist
conditions, and it is fast-growing under these conditions. It is intolerant of
poor soils and cold, drier climates.[6]

Cryptomeria is used as a food plant by the larvae of some moths of the genus
Endoclita including E. auratus, E. punctimargo and E. undulifer.

Sugi (and hinoki) pollen is a major cause of hay fever in Japan.

## Fossil record[edit]

The earliest fossil record of Cryptomeria are descriptions based on vegetative
organs of +Cryptomeria kamtschatica of the Late Eocene from Kamchatka, Russia
and +Cryptomeria protojaponica and +Cryptomeria sichotensis from the Oligocene
of Primorye, Russia. Several fossil leafy shots of +Cryptomeria yunnanensis
have been described from Rupelian stage strata of the Luhe Basin in Yunnan,
China.

For the Neogene, Cryptomeria is well represented as seed cones, leafy shoots
and wood in the fossil records of Europe and Japan. +Cryptomeria rhenana was
described from the early Late Miocene to the Late Miocene of Rhein in
Morsbach, Germany, from the Early and Middle Pliocene of Northern Italy, to
the Middle Pliocene of Dunarobba, Italy and to the Early Pleistocene of
Umbria, Italy. + Cryptomeria anglicawas described from the Late Miocene of La
Cerdana, Spain, to the Late Middle Miocene of Brjanslaekur, Iceland and from
the Late Miocene to the early Pliocene of Derbyshire, England. +Cryptomeria
miyataensis was described from the Late Miocene of Akita, Japan. Cryptomeria
japonica was described from the Late Miocene of Georgia and from the Pliocene
of Duab, Abkhazia. It has also been described from the Pliocene of Honshu,
Japan, Late Pliocene of Osaka, Japan and from the Pleistocene of Kyushu,
Japan.[7]

## Cultivation[edit]

### Timber[edit]

Cryptomeria japonica timber is extremely fragrant, weather and insect
resistant, soft, and with a low density. The timber is used for the making of
staves, tubs, casks, furniture and other indoor applications. Easy to saw and
season, it is favoured for light construction, boxes, veneers and plywood.
Wood that has been buried turns dark green and is much valued. Resin from the
tree contains cryptopimaric and phenolic acid.[8]

A forestry plantation of Cryptomeria

The wood is pleasantly scented, reddish-pink in colour, lightweight but
strong, waterproof and resistant to decay. It is favoured in Japan for all
types of construction work as well as interior panelling, etc. In Darjeeling
district and Sikkim in India, where it is one of the most widely growing
trees, C. japonica is called Dhuppi and is favoured for its light wood,
extensively used in house building.

#### Mechanical properties[edit]

In dry air conditions, the initial density of Japanese cedar timber has been
determined to be about 300-420 kg/m3.[9] It displays a Young's modulus of 8017
MPa, 753 MPa and 275 MPa in the longitudinal, radial and tangential direction
in relation to the wood fibers.[9]

### Ornamental[edit]

Grown as a bonsai

Cryptomeria japonica is extensively used in forestry plantations in Japan,
China and the Azores islands, and is widely cultivated as an ornamental tree
in other temperate areas, including Britain, Europe, North America and eastern
Himalaya regions of Nepal and India.

The cultivar 'Elegans' is notable for retaining juvenile foliage throughout
its life, instead of developing normal adult foliage when one year old (see
the picture with different shoots). It makes a small, shrubby tree 5-10 m
(16-33 ft) tall. There are numerous dwarf cultivars that are widely used in
rock gardens and for bonsai, including 'Tansu', 'Koshyi', 'Little Diamond',
'Yokohama' and 'Kilmacurragh.'

The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of
Garden Merit (confirmed 2017):[10]

  * Cryptomeria japonica[11]
  * C. japonica 'Bandai-sugi'[12]
  * C. japonica 'Elegans Compacta'[13]
  * C. japonica 'Globosa Nana'[14]
  * C. japonica 'Vilmoriniana'[15]

## Symbolism[edit]

Great sugi of Kayano

Sugi avenue at the Togakushi shrine in Nagano

Cryptomeria japonica \- MHNT

Sugi is the national tree of Japan, commonly planted around temples and
shrines, with many hugely impressive trees planted centuries ago. Sargent
(1894; The Forest Flora of Japan) recorded the instance of a daimyo (feudal
lord) who was too poor to donate a stone lantern at the funeral of the shogun
Tokugawa Ieyasu (1543-1616) at Nikko Tosho-gu, but requested instead to be
allowed to plant an avenue of sugi, so that "future visitors might be
protected from the heat of the sun". The offer was accepted; the Cedar Avenue
of Nikko, which still exists, is over 65 km (40 mi) long, and "has not its
equal in stately grandeur".[16]

## See also[edit]

  * Cedar wood
  * Great sugi of Kayano
  * Houkisugi at Nakagawa
  * Sugi no Osugi
  * Jomon Sugi
  * List of superlative trees
  * Onbashira
  * Magewappa a traditional Japanese wood craft using Cryptomeria

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Thomas, P.; Katsuki, T. & Farjon, A. (2013). "Cryptomeria japonica". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T39149A2886821. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T39149A2886821.en. Retrieved 4 December 2017.
  2. ^ This kanji for sugi is the same as the hanzi for shan, which is used for other species, for instance, shui shan, water fir, Metasequoia glyptostroboides.
  3. ^ "Cryptomeria japonica". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA. Retrieved 17 January 2016.
  4. ^ "BSBI List 2007". Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-01-25. Retrieved 2014-10-17.
  5. ^ Chen, Y.; Yang, S. Z.; Zhao, M. S.; Ni, B. Y.; Liu, L.; Chen, X. Y. (2008). "Demographic Genetic Structure of Cryptomeria japonica var. sinensis in Tianmushan Nature Reserve, China". Journal of Integrative Plant Biology. 50 (9): 1171-1177. doi:10.1111/j.1744-7909.2008.00725.x. PMID 18924282.
  6. ^ Fu, Liguo; Yu, Yong-fu; Mill, Robert R. "Cryptomeria". Flora of China. 4 - via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA.
  7. ^ Ding, Wen-Na; Kunzmannd, Lutz; Su, Tao; Huang, Jian; Zhou, Zhe-Kun (January 2018). "A new fossil species of Cryptomeria (Cupressaceae) from the Rupelian of the Luhe Basin, Yunnan, East Asia: Implications for palaeobiogeography and palaeoecology". Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology. 248: 41-51.
  8. ^ "Cryptomeria jponica" (PDF). World Agroforestry Centre. Retrieved 4 December 2014.
  9. ^ a b B. Anshari; Z.W. Guan; A. Kitamori; K. Jung; I. Hassel; K. Komatsub (2010). "Mechanical and moisture-dependent swelling properties of compressed Japanese cedar". Construction and Building Materials. 25 (4): 1718-1725. doi:10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2010.11.095.
  10. ^ "AGM Plants - Ornamental" (PDF). Royal Horticultural Society. July 2017. p. 25. Retrieved 24 January 2018.
  11. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cryptomeria japonica". Retrieved 18 June 2013.
  12. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cryptomeria japonica 'Bandai-sugi'". Retrieved 18 June 2013.
  13. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cryptomeria japonica 'Elegans Compacta'". Retrieved 18 June 2013.
  14. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cryptomeria japonica 'Globosa Nana'". Retrieved 18 June 2013.
  15. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cryptomeria japonica 'Vilmoriniana'". Retrieved 18 June 2013.
  16. ^ Sargent, Charles Sprague (1893). "Notes on the Forest Flora of Japan". Garden and Forest. 6 (296): 442-443.

## Further reading[edit]

  * Cryptomeria anglica, Boulter and Chaloner, 1968; a fossil species from Pliocene deposits in Derbyshire, England.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to:

Cryptomeria japonica (category)  
  
  * Cryptomeria japonica, Morton Arboretum acc. 560-82*11 & 12
  * USDA Forest Service Fact Sheet ST-219 Japanese Cedar (pdf)
  * Conifers Around the World: Cryptomeria japonica - Sugi.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Cryptomeria japonica

  * Wikidata: Q147388
  * Wikispecies: Cryptomeria japonica
  * ARKive: cryptomeria-japonica
  * BioLib: 2396
  * Conifers.org: Cryptomeria
  * EoL: 126871
  * EPPO: CMYJA
  * FoC: 200005392
  * GBIF: 5284237
  * GRIN: 12526
  * iNaturalist: 71147
  * IPNI: 261870-1
  * IRMNG: 11165901
  * ITIS: 501832
  * IUCN: 39149
  * NBN: NHMSYS0000457746
  * NCBI: 3369
  * NZOR: 72268e9a-717b-4faa-8dba-dd137fc44b0c
  * PalDat: Cryptomeria_japonica
  * Plant List: kew-2746448
  * PLANTS: CRJA3
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:261870-1
  * Tropicos: 31300023
  * WCSP: 382991

  
  
Cupressus japonica

  * Wikidata: Q17363882
  * GBIF: 3611545
  * GRIN: 12653
  * IPNI: 261935-1
  * NZOR: 86cacedc-7863-47b8-bb07-0ea2cca2e572
  * Tropicos: 9400407

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cryptomeria&oldid=853812072"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List near threatened species
  * Cupressaceae
  * Endemic flora of Japan
  * Trees of Japan
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Near threatened plants
  * Garden plants of Asia
  * Ornamental trees
  * Monotypic conifer genera

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Articles containing Japanese-language text
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Taxonbars with automatically added basionyms

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Dolnoserbski
  * Esperanto
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * ?????
  * ???????
  * ????
  * ????? ????
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ??????
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * ????? ????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Turkce
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 7 August 2018, at 03:24 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

