# Juniperus bermudiana

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For other uses, see Bermudiana (disambiguation).

Bermuda cedar  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Critically Endangered (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom:  Plantae  
Division:  Pinophyta  
Class:  Pinopsida  
Order:  Pinales  
Family:  Cupressaceae  
Genus:  Juniperus  
Species:  J. bermudiana  
Binomial name  
Juniperus bermudiana  
L.  
  
Juniperus bermudiana is a species of juniper endemic to Bermuda. This species
is most commonly known as Bermuda cedar, but is also referred to as Bermuda
juniper. Historically, this tree formed woodland that covered much of Bermuda.
Settlers cleared part of the forest and the tree was used for many purposes
including building construction and was especially prized for shipbuilding.
However scale insects introduced during World War II devastated the forests,
killing over 99% of the Bermuda cedar. Since then, the salt tolerant casuarina
has been planted as a replacement species, and a small number of Bermuda
cedars have been found to be resistant to the scale insects. Populations of
certain endemic birds which had co-evolved with the tree, have plummeted as a
result of its demise. It was at one time introduced to Hawaii where it still
flourishes.

## Contents

  * 1 Description
  * 2 Ecology
  * 3 Uses and history
  * 4 External links
  * 5 References

## Description[edit]

The Bermuda cedar is an evergreen tree growing up to 15 m tall with a trunk up
to 60 cm thick (larger specimens existed in the past) and thin bark that
exfoliates in strips. The foliage is produced in blue-green sprays, with the
individual shoots 1.3-1.6 mm wide, four-sided (quadriform) in section. The
leaves are scale-like 1.5-2.5 mm long (up to 4 mm long on strong-growing
shoots) and 1-1.5 mm broad, with an inconspicuous gland; they are arranged in
opposite decussate pairs, occasionally decussate whorls of three. Juvenile
plants bear needle-like leaves 4-8 mm long. The seed cones are irregularly
globose to broad pyriform, 4-6 mm long and 5-8 mm broad, soft and berry-like,
green at first, maturing bluish-purple about 8 months after pollination; they
contain one or two (rarely three) seeds. The male cones are 4-6 mm long,
yellow, turning brown after pollen release in early spring.

## Ecology[edit]

Old-growth trees survive and prosper in a Paget garden.

A threat to the continued existence of Bermuda's cedars arose in the mid-1940s
when the species was attacked by two species of scale insects, Lepidosaphes
newsteadi and Carulaspis minima, which were unintentionally introduced from
the United States' mainland during the wartime construction of US airbases in
Bermuda. By 1978, these parasites had killed 99% of Bermuda's cedars, some 8
million trees. However, the remaining 1% of the trees proved somewhat
resistant to the scale insects, and efforts by Bermuda's Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Parks to plant young cedars from this resistant
strain throughout Bermuda have saved the trees from extinction.

In the 1950s and 1960s, the casuarina (Casuarina equisetifolia, also known as
horsetail tree and Australian pine), native to Australia, was introduced into
Bermuda to replace the Bermuda cedar's windbreak functions. However, in
Bermuda, casuarinas have proved to be highly aggressive, and no other plants
are able to survive beneath them. Still, like the Bermuda cedar, the
casuarina's foliage is resistant to wind and salt, and these features have
made casuarinas popular with gardeners in Bermuda. Other species introduced in
an attempt to replace the cedar forest included the bay grape (Coccoloba
uvifera). Along with the casuarina, the cedar's main introduced competitor for
space is the Brazilian pepper (Schinus terebinthifolius).

The species is occasionally grown as an ornamental tree outside of Bermuda,
and may have become naturalised on Hawaii and Saint Helena. It is reported
that more than 6,500 of them were planted in Hawaii between 1921 and 1953, and
that it has established wild populations there.[2]

The Bermuda cedar forests that covered Bermuda fed and housed many species of
bird that had evolved and adapted to live amongst them, and thus became
endemic to Bermuda. With the loss of so many trees the populations of such
species have plummeted to near extinction. These birds include the Bermuda
white-eyed vireo, and a possible subspecies of eastern bluebird. Efforts by
the public and the government have been made to boost their populations along
with the populations of the Bermuda cedar. However the Bermuda cedar may take
200 years to reach full maturity, and the birds may not survive this long.
With recent sea level rises, some low-lying old-growth cedars are being
infiltrated with seawater and are beginning to die off.

## Uses and history[edit]

A postcard of Cedar Avenue in Hamilton, Bermuda before the species declined.

It is known for its heavy, sweet aroma, useful and attractive reddish timber,
significant role in Bermuda's history, and notable presence in Bermuda's
historic homes.

When English settlers arrived in Bermuda, forests of Bermuda cedar flourished
throughout the islands, and the species continued to thrive even as settlers
developed the land. The wood was utilized by settlers for widely varying
purposes, including home, church, jail, and shipbuilding, interior
woodworking, furniture construction, coffin-making, and export for sale. In
addition, the cones were used by settlers as food for both themselves and
their animals, and to prepare cedarberry syrup as a treatment for toothaches
and coughs. Settlers also boiled the shoots in water to create an elixir for
lowering fevers. Furthermore, the wood was found to repel moths and fleas as
well as prevent mildew and rot, so many Bermuda residents used the wood to
line closets and drawers.

The Featherbed Alley Printshop Museum, in the cellar of the Mitchell House,
built c. 1720, which features cedar beams, though the floor boards above are
of then-more expensive, imported wood.

The wood was especially prized by shipbuilders. It could be worked as soon as
it was felled, and was naturally resistant to rot and woodworms. It was as
strong as oak, but much lighter, contributing to the speed and
maneouverability for which Bermudian ships were noted and prized. Its
abundance enabled Bermudians to turn wholesale to a maritime economy after the
dissolution of the Somers Isles Company in 1684.

In 1627, in an effort to conserve Bermuda's cedar forests, the local assembly
passed legislation to restrict export of Bermuda cedar for shipbuilding. In
addition, between 1693 and 1878, the Bermuda legislature passed sixteen
further acts placing restrictions on the uses of Bermuda cedar. Despite these
Acts, the shipbuilding industry eventually denuded much of Bermuda's landscape
by the 1830s. Only the dawn of the age of steam-driven, steel-hulled ships
allowed the forest to recover.

Many historic homes in Bermuda feature interior woodwork and furnishings made
from Bermuda cedar. Examples of these homes include the Mayflower House,
Camden House, Tucker House, and Verdmont House, the latter of which, according
to the Bermuda National Trust, contains the colony's finest collection of
antique Bermuda cedar furnishings. Because it is now both scarce, and
expensive, and it is featured in many grand homes, its scent has come to be
associated with wealth.

The Bermuda hedge fund Juniperus Capital is named after this species.[3]

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juniperus bermudiana.  
  
  * Food & Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations: "The Bermuda Cedar". Gordon Groves, Director of Agriculture, Bermuda.
  * Bermuda Government, Department of Conservation Services: "Species Profile - Bermuda Cedar".

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Wingate, D.B.; Adams, R. & Gardner, M. (2011). "Juniperus bermudiana". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2011: e.T30376A9532928. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2011-2.RLTS.T30376A9532928.en. Retrieved 9 November 2017.
  2. ^ Little Jr., Elbert L. (1989). Common Forest Trees of Hawaii (Native and Introduced). U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service. p. 321.
  3. ^ "Origin of the Juniperus Name". Juniperus Capital. Retrieved January 17, 2011.

  * Conifer Specialist Group (1998). "Juniperus bermudiana". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2006. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 11 May 2006. Listed as Critically Endangered (CR B1+2c v2.3)
  * Adams, R. P. (2004). Junipers of the World: The genus Juniperus. Trafford Publishing ISBN 978-1-4120-4250-5
  * Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Juniperus bermudiana". The Gymnosperm Database.
  * Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 978-1-84246-068-9
  * Bermuda Aquarium, Museum, & Zoo. Bermuda Biodiversity Project. Retrieved April 3, 2006.
  * Forbes, Keith Archibald (2006). Bermuda's Flora. Bermuda Online. Retrieved April 3, 2006.
  * Forbes, Keith Archibald (2006). Bermuda's Historic Houses. Bermuda Online. Retrieved April 3, 2006.
  * Morisawa, TunyaLee (1999). Weed Notes: Juniperus bermudiana (pdf file). Retrieved April 3, 2006.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q822052
  * Wikispecies: Juniperus bermudiana
  * ARKive: juniperus-bermudiana
  * Conifers.org: Juniperus_bermudiana
  * EoL: 126867
  * EPPO: IUPBE
  * GBIF: 2684610
  * GRIN: 20809
  * iNaturalist: 135977
  * IPNI: 279056-2
  * IUCN: 30376
  * NCBI: 884032
  * NZOR: 6fc8240f-6d70-4d21-9225-074515a99acc
  * Plant List: kew-2332581
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:279056-2
  * Tropicos: 9400716
  * WCSP: 377429

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juniperus_bermudiana&oldid=853807788"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List critically endangered species
  * Juniperus
  * Trees of Bermuda
  * Plants described in 1753
  * Critically endangered flora of North America
  * Taxa named by Carl Linnaeus

Hidden categories:

  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Az?rbaycanca
  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Esperanto
  * Norsk
  * ??????
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 7 August 2018, at 02:54 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[c.]: circa
  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

