# Metasequoia glyptostroboides

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Metasequoia glyptostroboides  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Endangered (IUCN 3.1)  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Metasequoia  
Species:  M. glyptostroboides  
Binomial name  
Metasequoia glyptostroboides  
Hu and W.C.Cheng, 1948  
  
Metasequoia glyptostroboides, the dawn redwood, is a fast-growing, endangered
deciduous conifer, the sole living species of the genus Metasequoia, one of
three species in the subfamily Sequoioideae. It is native to Lichuan county in
the Hubei province of China. Although shortest of the redwoods, it can grow to
at least 165 ft (50 m) in height.

In 1941, the genus Metasequoia was originally reported by palaeobotanist
Shigeru Miki as a widely distributed extinct genus based on fossils, before
attracting considerable attention a few years later when small populations
were found in central China. It is a particularly well-known example of a
living fossil species. The tree faces considerable risks of extinction in its
wild range due to deforestation, and so has been planted extensively in
arboreta worldwide, where it has proved a popular and fast-growing ornamental
plant.

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Related species
  * 3 Appearance
  * 4 Conservation
  * 5 Cultivation
    * 5.1 In the United Kingdom
    * 5.2 In the United States
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 External links

## History[edit]

Metasequoia glyptostroboides (dawn redwood) bonsai tree

Though once common across the northern hemisphere, the dawn redwood was
originally considered extinct. The genus Metasequoia was first described in
1941 as a fossil of the Mesozoic Era, and none of the fossils discovered were
less than 150 million years old. Dr. Shigeru Miki (1901-1974), a paleobotanist
from Kyoto University, identified a divergent leaf form while studying fossil
samples of the family Cupressaceae and realized he was looking at a new genus,
which he named Metasequoia, meaning "like a sequoia".

In the same year a forester named T. Kan came across an enormous living
specimen while performing a survey in Sichuan and Hubei provinces. Though
unaware of Miki's new genus, he recognized the unique traits of the tree. It
formed part of a local shrine, where villagers called it Shui-shan ?? or
"water fir".[1][2]

In 1943, Zhan Wang (1911-2000), a Chinese forestry official, collected samples
from an unidentified tree in Modaoxi, China (presently, Moudao, Lichuan
County, Hubei)--now believed to be the same tree Kan discovered.[3] The samples
were determined to belong to a tree yet unknown to science, but World War II
postponed further study.

Professors Wan Chun Cheng and Hu Xiansu made the pivotal connection between
Miki's genus and the living samples in 1946,[4] and provided the specific
epithet "glyptostroboides", after its resemblance to the Chinese swamp cypress
(Glyptostrobus).[5]

In 1948 the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University funded an expedition to
collect seeds from Kan's original tree and, soon after, distributed seeds and
seedlings to various universities and arboreta worldwide for growth trials. Of
these, two were distributed to the H. H. Hunnewell estate in Wellesley, MA,
where they are still alive as of 2016. The seeds distributed to Hillier
Gardens near Winchester, UK have thrived and are now the emblem of the
gardens. Seedlings have been for sale since 1949.[6]

## Related species[edit]

Together with Sequoia sempervirens (coast redwood) and Sequoiadendron
giganteum (giant sequoia) of California, M. glyptostroboides is classified in
the subfamily Sequoioideae of the family Cupressaceae. Although it is the only
living species in its genus, three fossil species are known as well. The other
Sequoioideae and several other genera have been transferred from the
Taxodiaceae to the Cupressaceae based on DNA analysis.[7]

## Appearance[edit]

  * Dawn redwood foliage - note opposite arrangement 

  * Pollen bearing cones 

  * Young leaves 

  * Young seed bearing cones 

  * Mature seed bearing cones 

  * Mature tree 

While the bark and foliage are similar to another closely related genus of
redwoods, Sequoia, M. glyptostroboides differs from the coast redwood in that
it is deciduous, like Taxodium distichum (bald cypress). Similar to T.
distichum, older trees may form wide buttresses on the lower trunk. M.
glyptostroboides is a fast-growing tree, exceeding 35 m (115 ft) in height and
1 m (3.3 ft) in trunk diameter by the age of 50, in cultivation (with the
potential to grow to even greater dimensions). The trunk forms a distinctive
"armpit" under each branch. The bark is vertically fissured and tends to
exfoliate in ribbon-like strips.

The largest dawn redwood recorded was an isolated specimen in China about 50
meters (165 feet) tall and 2.2 meters (7.2 feet) wide. This tree was killed by
a lightning strike in 1951.[8] Several dawn redwoods of this height still live
in the eastern part of Shuishaba Valley, AKA Metasequoia Valley, where the
tree was discovered.[8][9] The tree's true potential size is much larger, as
logs up to 8 meters (26 feet) wide at the base have been discovered in rice
paddies.

The thickest and tallest dawn redwoods listed by Momumental Trees are both in
the Longwood Gardens of Kennett Square in Pennsylvania, United States. The
widest has a girth at breast height of 5.79 m (19 ft, average diameter 1.84 m,
6 ft), and is 30.18 m (99 ft) tall. The tallest is 41.15 m (135 ft) tall, and
has a girth at breast height of 3.35 m (11 ft, average diameter 1.07 m, 3.5
ft). Both trees were planted in 1948 and measured in 2018.[10]

The leaves are opposite, 1-3 cm (0.39-1.18 in) long, and bright fresh green,
turning a foxy reddish brown in fall. The pollen cones are 5-6 mm (0.20-0.24
in) long, produced on long spikes in early spring; they are produced only on
trees growing in regions with hot summers. The cones are globose to ovoid,
1.5-2.5 cm (0.59-0.98 in) in diameter with 16-28 scales arranged in opposite
pairs in four rows, each pair at right angles to the adjacent pair; they
mature in about 8-9 months after pollination.

## Conservation[edit]

In Lichuan, Hubei, there is a dawn redwood forest consisting of barely 5,000
trees[11] (by another count, around 5,400 trees.[12]), and some smaller groups
(typically, under 30 trees each).[12] The floodplain of Metasequoia Valley in
Hubei had already been turned to rice paddies by the time of the tree's
discovery, but was once probably a more extensive dawn redwood forest. Such a
forest would have been similar to bald cypress forests in the United States,
with many similar species growing in association. Nearly 3,000 trunks were
found in the floor of the valley, ranging from 2 meters (6.5 feet) to 8 meters
(26 feet) wide at the base. Additionally, houses made of Metasequoia wood
200-300 years old still exist and probably date back to the original
settlement of the valley.[9][13] Since its discovery, the dawn redwood has
become something of a national point of pride, and it is protected under
Chinese law and also planted widely.[11] However, it is still listed as
endangered in the wild.[14] Cutting of trees or branches is illegal, but the
demand for seedlings drives cone collection to the point that natural
reproduction is no longer occurring in the dawn redwood forest.[11] In
addition, the landscape has been highly modified by human use, and a 1980
expedition found that the habitat has significantly degraded since the tree's
discovery. Most of the other vegetation has been cut, and most of the area is
no longer suitable ground for seedlings.[8] Between 1950 and 1980 several
hundred were logged in Metasequoia Valley, some over 2 meters (6.5 feet)
wide.[8][9] A survey in the 2000s counted and measured all wild dawn redwoods.
The remaining healthy trees range from 25 cm (10 in) to 1.65 m (5.4 ft) wide
at breast height, 12-51 m (39.5-167.5 ft) in height, and estimated 41-265
years in age. The average size was 27 m (88.5 ft) tall and 0.45-0.9 m (1.5-3
ft) wide at breast height, with an estimated age of about 95 years. (The type
tree, 2.48 m (8 ft) at breast height, was in poor health and therefore
excluded from the study) No seedlings were found, and if they ever do appear
it is legal to remove and transplant them.[13] The species will continue to
live in yards, parks and on roadsides all over China, but the M.
glyptostroboides forest ecosystem could disappear when its mature trees
die.[citation needed]

Pizhou, Jiangsu boasts the longest dawn redwood avenue in the world. The
avenue is approximately 60 km long with over one million trees.[15][16]

## Cultivation[edit]

Since the tree's rediscovery in 1943, the dawn redwood has become a popular
ornamental tree in parks and gardens worldwide.

Dawn redwood has proved an easy tree to grow in temperate regions, and is now
widely planted as an ornamental tree. Planted trees have already reached at
least up to 1.84 meters (6 feet) in diameter at breast height and 41.15 meters
(135 feet) tall, despite being in cultivation for only 70 years. This rapid
rate of growth has led to consideration for using the tree in forestry
plantations. It has been discovered that M. glyptostroboides will thrive in
standing water, much like Bald Cypress, and if left branched to the ground in
full sun, will develop the large, contorted boles that have made it famous.
Limbing or pruning at an early age will prohibit this formation later on.

In cultivation, M. glyptostroboides is hardy to USDA Zone 5, making it hardy
down to lows of -25 ?F (-32 ?C). It is tolerant of soggy, waterlogged soils;
in the wild it is adapted to growing on flood plains. Until it is established
in a specific site, it is prone to drought and inadequate water availability.
The dawn redwood is recommended for urban areas in the Midwest, Southeast, and
East Coast of North America, as its fast growth rate and tolerance for air
pollution make it widely adaptable and able to thrive where other species
might suffer. This species tends to struggle without irrigation in arid
climates such as the American West unless planted directly on or adjacent to a
body of water such as a pond or stream. This species is also highly
susceptible to damage from contact with heavy amounts of winter de-icing
salt.[17]

In the 1980s, it was discovered that many of the second generation trees in
cultivation suffered from inbreeding depression (extremely low genetic
variability) which could lead to increased susceptibility to disease and
reproductive failure. Many sources claim that the original 1947 seedlots came
from as few as one tree, however this has proven to be false. The original
seeds did have a wide range of source trees, and the inbreeding depression is
more likely to come from self-pollination by isolated trees. However, the
total cultivated population still had less genetic variation than the wild
ones, and more widespread seed-collecting expeditions in China in the 1990s
sought to resolve this problem and restore genetic diversity to cultivated M.
glyptostroboides.[18]

### In the United Kingdom[edit]

The dawn redwood is frequently encountered across the UK. Growth has been
fastest in the south-east, but it is believed the tree may have a longer
future in the more humid western regions. The TROBI Champions are at Woking
Park, Surrey: 22 m height by 144 cm d.b.h, Clare College, Cambridge: 21 m x
129 cm (planted 1949), and Wayford Woods, Somerset: 32 m x 99 cm.[19]

Several cultivars are available providing a range of different foliage colours
and textures. The cultivar 'Gold Rush' has gained the Royal Horticultural
Society's Award of Garden Merit.[20][21]

### In the United States[edit]

Dawn redwoods thrive over a large, crescent-shaped region that encompasses the
eastern and southern United States. Many institutions, such as the Arnold
Arboretum of Harvard University have fine specimens, but the Crescent Ridge
Dawn Redwoods Preserve in North Carolina remains the only endeavor for the re-
introduction of the species into a natural setting in the US.

There is a small grove of dawn redwoods at Bailey Arboretum in Locust Valley,
NY, including one tree which is claimed to be the world's largest by
diameter.[22] The New York City Department of Parks and Recreation has begun
planting dawn redwoods on sidewalks throughout Manhattan and Brooklyn.

This tree is sparingly naturalizing in parts of New Jersey and
Appalachia.[citation needed]

## See also[edit]

  * Displaying autumn foliage in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 

  * The trunk of an adult tree 

  * The base of the trunk. 

  * Pollen (a.k.a. "male") cones 

  * A specimen at Croxteth Hall in Liverpool: summer foliage 

  * Same specimen: autumn foliage 

  * Dawn Redwoods in Spokane, WA 

  * Metasequoia glyptostroboides in Sagamihara Park 

  * Contour of Metasequoia glyptostroboides 

## References[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Metasequoia glyptostroboides.  
  
  1. ^ Bartholomew, Bruce; Boufford, David E.; Spongberg, Stephen A. (January 1983). "Metasequoia glyptostroboides--Its present status in central China". Journal of the Arnold Arboretum. 64 (1): 105-28. JSTOR 43782567.
  2. ^ This hanzi for "fir" is the same as the kanji for another species, Cryptomeria japonica, that is, sugi, Japanese cedar. sugi in Wolfgang Hadamitzky and Mark Spahn (2011), Japanese Kanji and Kana: A Complete Guide to the Japanese Writing System, Rutland, VT: Tuttle, p. 361, Kanji 2033.
  3. ^ Ma, Jinshuang; Shao, Guofan (2003). "Rediscovery of the 'first collection' of the 'Living Fossil', Metasequoia glyptostroboides". Taxon. 52 (3): 585-8. doi:10.2307/3647458.
  4. ^ Ma, Jinshuang (2003). "The chronology of the "living fossil" Metasequoia glyptostroboides (Taxodiaceae): A review (1943-2003)" (PDF). Harvard Papers in Botany. 8 (1): 9-18. Retrieved 22 March 2014.
  5. ^ "Crescent Ridge_History".
  6. ^ "At Hillier Gardens".
  7. ^ Gadek, P.A., Alpers, D.L., Heslewood, M.M., and Quinn, C.J. (2000). Relationships within Cupressaceae sensu lato: A combined morphological and molecular approach. American Journal of Botany, 87(7): 1044-1057.
  8. ^ a b c d http://www.conifers.org/cu/Metasequoia.php[full citation needed]
  9. ^ a b c http://arnoldia.arboretum.harvard.edu/pdf/articles/1998-58-4-metasequoia-glyptostroboides-its-status-in-central-china-in-1980-1983.pdf[full citation needed]
  10. ^ https://www.monumentaltrees.com/en/trees/dawnredwood/records/
  11. ^ a b c Save The Redwoods League, Fall Bulletin, 1999, PDF 2.7 MB
  12. ^ a b Langlois, Gaytha A. (2005). "A conservation plan for Metasequoia in China". In LePage, Ben A.; Williams, Christopher James; Yang, Hong. The geobiology and ecology of Metasequoia. Volume 22 of Topics in geobiology. Springer. p. 369\. ISBN 1-4020-2631-5.
  13. ^ a b Tang, Cindy Q; Yang, Yongchuan; Ohsawa, Masahiko; Momohara, Arata; Hara, Masatoshi; Cheng, Shaolin; Fan, Shenghou (2011). "Population structure of relict Metasequoia glyptostroboides and its habitat fragmentation and degradation in south-central China". Biological Conservation. 144: 279. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2010.09.003.
  14. ^ Farjon, A. (2013). "Metasequoia glyptostroboides". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T32317A2814244. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T32317A2814244.en. Retrieved 16 January 2018. Listed as Endangered B1ab(iii,v), v3.1
  15. ^ The Creation of the Longest Avenue in The World, Arboricultural Journal: The International Journal of Urban Forestry, 2013.
  16. ^ The Longest Avenue, The Horticulturalist: The Journal of the Institute of Horticulture, 2013.
  17. ^ Dirr, M.A. 1998. Manual of Woody Landscape Plants. Stipes Publishing Co., Champaign, IL. (1453 p.)
  18. ^ http://arnoldia.arboretum.harvard.edu/pdf/articles/2010-68-1-conserving-the-dawn-redwood-the-ex-situ-collection-at-the-dawes-arboretum.pdf[full citation needed]
  19. ^ Johnson, O. (2011). Champion Trees of Britain & Ireland.  p.111. Kew Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84246-452-6
  20. ^ "RHS Plantfinder - Gold Rush = 'Golden Oji'". Retrieved 4 April 2018.
  21. ^ "AGM Plants - Ornamental" (PDF). Royal Horticultural Society. July 2017. p. 64. Retrieved 4 April 2018.
  22. ^ "Bailey Arboretum - the Dawn Redwood".

## Further reading[edit]

  * He, Zican, Jianqiang Li, Qing Cai, Xiaodong Li, and Hongwen Huang. 2004. "Cytogenetic Studies on Metasequoia Glyptostroboides, a Living Fossil Species". Genetica. 122, no. 3: 269-276.
  * International Metasequoia Symposium, Ben A. LePage, Christopher J. Williams, and Hong Yang. The Geobiology and Ecology of Metasequoia. Topics in geobiology, v. 22. Dordrecht: Springer, 2005. ISBN 1-4020-2764-8
  * Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on Metasequoia and Associated Plants, August 6-10, 2006, Metasequoia: Back from the Brink? An Update. Edited by Hong Yang and Leo J. Hickey. Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural History, Volume 48, Issue 2 31 October 2007, pp. 179-426. [1]
  * Bartholomew, Bruce, D. E. Boufford, and S. A. Spongberg. "Metasequoia glyptostroboides--Its present status in central China." Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 64.1 (1983): 105-128.
  * Farjon, A. (2005). Monograph of Cupressaceae and Sciadopitys. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 1-84246-068-4.
  * Hanks, D.A. Crescent Ridge Dawn Redwoods Preserve (2005). http://www.dawnredwood.org
  * Jahren, A. H. & Sternberg, L. S. L. (2003). Humidity estimate for the middle Eocene Arctic rain forest. Geology May 2003 pdf file
  * LePage, Ben A.; Williams, Christopher James; Yang, Hong, eds. (2005). The geobiology and ecology of Metasequoia. Volume 22 of Topics in geobiology. Springer. ISBN 1-4020-2631-5
  * "Metasequoia Glyptostroboides". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved September 25, 2006.
  * "Metasequoia stumps, Axel Heiberg Island" (PDF). (804 KB)
  * Williams C.J., LePage, B.A., Vann D.R., Tange, T., Ikeda, H., Ando, M., Kusakabe, T., Tsuzuki, T. and T. Sweda. (2003). Structure, allometry, and biomass of plantation Metasequoia glyptostroboides[permanent dead link] in Japan. Forest Ecology and Management, 180(103): 287-301. [2]
  * Williams C.J., Johnson A.H., LePage, B.A., Vann D.R. and T. Sweda. 2003. Reconstruction of Tertiary Metasequoia Forests II. Structure, Biomass and Productivity of Eocene Floodplain Forests in the Canadian Arctic. Paleobiology, 29(2): 271-292. [3][permanent dead link]

## External links[edit]

  * Metasequoia in The Gymnosperm database
  * Crescent Ridge Dawn Redwoods Preserve
  * The metasequoia organisation
  * More information on the Dawn Redwood, including largest specimens
  * Giant redwoods in the U.K.

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q156800
  * Wikispecies: Metasequoia glyptostroboides
  * ARKive: metasequoia-glyptostroboides
  * EoL: 1034875
  * EPPO: MEQGL
  * FoC: 200005396
  * Fossilworks: 55255
  * GBIF: 5284231
  * GRIN: 24198
  * iNaturalist: 69150
  * IPNI: 828387-1
  * IRMNG: 11065479
  * ITIS: 505864
  * IUCN: 32317
  * NBN: NHMSYS0000460703
  * NCBI: 3371
  * NZOR: 143a7e04-1ab2-49ea-a7d1-53743542e975
  * PalDat: Metasequoia_glyptostroboides
  * Plant List: kew-2508478
  * PLANTS: MEGL8
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:828387-1
  * Tropicos: 31300021
  * WCSP: 379270

  
  
Authority control

  * NDL: 00577499

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metasequoia_glyptostroboides&oldid=853878237"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List endangered species
  * Metasequoia
  * Endemic flora of China
  * Flora of Hubei
  * Flora of Sichuan
  * Living fossils
  * Trees of China
  * Plants described in 1948
  * Garden plants of Asia
  * Ornamental trees
  * Critically endangered flora of Asia

Hidden categories:

  * Articles needing more detailed references
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018
  * Articles with inconsistent citation formats
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from January 2018
  * Articles with permanently dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from August 2018
  * Taxonbars with 20+ taxon IDs
  * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * ???????
  * Az?rbaycanca
  * ??????
  * Brezhoneg
  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cestina
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * ????????
  * Espanol
  * Esperanto
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * ???
  * ???????
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Italiano
  * ?????
  * ???????
  * ????
  * ????? ????
  * Latviesu
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * ???
  * Norsk
  * ????? ????
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * Portugues
  * ???????
  * Scots
  * Simple English
  * Slovencina
  * Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Turkce
  * ??????
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 7 August 2018, at 14:50 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

