# Cupressus nootkatensis

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Cupressus nootkatensis  
Foliage and green cone, Mount Rainier National Park  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Cupressaceae  
Genus: Cupressus  
Species:  C. nootkatensis  
Binomial name  
Cupressus nootkatensis  
D.Don 1824  
Natural range of Cupressus nootkatensis  
Synonyms[1]  
  
  * Callitropsis nootkatensis (D.Don) Oerst. ex D.P.Little
  * Callitropsis nootkatensis (D. Don) Florin
  * Chamaecyparis nootkatensis (D. Don) Sudw.
  * Chamaecyparis nootkatensis (D.Don) Spach
  * Chamaecyparis nutkaensis Lindl. & Gordon
  * Cupressus americana Trautv.
  * Cupressus nutkatensis Hook.
  * Thuja excelsa Bong.
  * Thujopsis borealis Carriere
  * Thujopsis cupressoides Carriere
  * Thujopsis tchugatskoyae Carriere
  * Xanthocyparis nootkatensis (D.Don) Farjon & D.K.Harder

  
  
Cupressus nootkatensis is a species of trees in the cypress family native to
the coastal regions of northwestern North America. This species goes by many
common names including: Nootka cypress, yellow cypress, Alaska cypress, Nootka
cedar, yellow cedar, Alaska cedar, and Alaska yellow cedar. The specific
epithet "nootkatensis" is derived from its discovery on the lands of a First
Nation of Canada, those lands of the Nuu-chah-nulth people of Vancouver
Island, British Columbia, who were formerly referred to as the Nootka.

## Contents

  * 1 Taxonomy
  * 2 Description
    * 2.1 Climate-related mortality
  * 3 Uses
    * 3.1 Historically
    * 3.2 Construction
    * 3.3 Landscaping
    * 3.4 Firewood
  * 4 Indigenous societies
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

## Taxonomy[edit]

First described in the genus Cupressus as Cupressus nootkatensis in 1824, it
was transferred to Chamaecyparis in 1841 on the basis of its foliage being in
flattened sprays, as in other Chamaecyparis, but unlike most (though not all)
other Cupressus species.

However, this placement does not fit with the morphology and phenology of the
cones, which are far more like Cupressus, like them maturing in two years, not
one. Genetic evidence, published by Gadek et al.,[2] strongly supported its
return to Cupressus and exclusion from Chamaecyparis.

More recently, Farjon et al. (2002) transferred it to a new genus
Xanthocyparis, together with the newly discovered Vietnamese golden cypress
Xanthocyparis vietnamensis; this species is remarkably similar to Nootka
cypress and the treatment has many arguments in its favour, as while they are
not related to Chamaecyparis, neither do they fit fully in Cupressus despite
the many similarities.

Little et al.,[3][4] while confirming the above relationship with further
evidence, pointed out that an earlier nomenclatural combination in the genus
Callitropsis existed, as Callitropsis nootkatensis (D.Don) Oerst., published
in 1864 but overlooked or ignored by other subsequent authors. Little et
al.[4] therefore synonymised Xanthocyparis with Callitropsis, the correct name
for these species under the ICBN when treated in a distinct genus. The name
Xanthocyparis has now been proposed for conservation, and the 2011
International Botanical Congress followed that recommendation.[5]

In 2010, Mao et al. performed a more detailed molecular analysis and placed
Nootka cypress back in Cupressus.[6][7] However, this is disputed, as the tree
would compose a monophyletic subgenus. "The argument that it warrants
treatment as a monotypic genus is not without merit, in which case the correct
name is Callitropsis nootkatensis."[8]

## Description[edit]

Nootka cypress is native to the west coast of North America, from the Kenai
Peninsula in Alaska, south to the Klamath Mountains in northernmost
California. It is typically occurring on wet sites in mountains, often close
to the tree line, but sometimes also at lower altitudes.[9][10]

Cupressus nootkatensis is an evergreen tree growing up to 40 meters (133 feet)
tall, commonly with pendulous branches. The foliage is in flat sprays, with
dark green, 3-5 mm long scale-leaves. The cones have 4 (occasionally 6)
scales, and resemble the cones of Mexican cypress (Cupressus lusitanica,
another Cupressus species which can show foliage in flat sprays) fairly
closely, except being somewhat smaller, typically 10-14 mm diameter; each
scale has a pointed triangular bract about 1.5-2 mm long, again similar to
other Cupressus and unlike the crescent-shaped, non-pointed bract on the
scales of Chamaecyparis cones. The Caren Range on the west coast of British
Columbia is home to the oldest Nootka cypress specimens in the world, with one
specimen found to be 1,834 years old (Gymnosperm Database).[11][12][13]

Cupressus nootkatensis is one of the parents of the hybrid Leyland cypress;
the other parent, Monterey cypress, is also in genus Cupressus, although in
the North American Hesperocyparis clade, which has generally been found to be
phylogenetically closer to C. nootkatensis than the Old World clade Cupressus
sensu stricto (e.g., Mao et al. 2010).

### Climate-related mortality[edit]

See also: Yellow-cedar decline

In Alaska, where the tree is primarily referred to as "yellow cedar,"
extensive research has been conducted into large-scale die-offs of yellow
cedar stands. These studies have concluded that the tree has depended upon
heavy coastal snowpacks to insulate its shallow roots from cold Arctic
winters. The impacts of climate change have resulted in thinner, less-
persistent snowpacks, in turn causing increased susceptibility to freeze
damage.[14] This mortality has been observed over 7% of the species range,
covering approximately 10 degrees of latitude from northern southeast Alaska
to southern British Columbia. Substantial future mortality is likely due to
warming temperatures and decreasing snowpacks.[15] The U.S. Fish & Wildlife
Service is reviewing whether to designate the species as threatened or
endangered.[16][17][18]

  * Mature individual with foliage in flat sprays hanging from branches 

  * Cone detail 

  * seeds 

  * bark 

  * C. nootkatensis 'Glauca' 

  * Young tree in North Cascades National Park. 

## Uses[edit]

### Historically[edit]

This species has been considered to be one of the finest timber trees in the
world and has been exported to China during the last century. The wood has
been used for flooring, interior finish and shipbuilding[19]

### Construction[edit]

The various physical properties of the wood make it an attractive material for
both general construction and boat building. Due to its slow growth it is hard
and, like other cypress woods it is durable; it therefore offers good
dimensional stability, and is resistant to weather, insects, and contact with
soil. It works easily with hand or machine tools; it turns and carves quite
well. It can be fastened with glues, screws, and nails. Nootka cypress's
texture, uniform color, and straight grain will take a fine finish. It resists
splintering and wears smoothly over time. When fresh cut it has a somewhat
unpleasant bitter scent, but when seasoned it has barely any discernible
scent, hence its traditional use in face masks.

Due to its expense, it is used mainly for finished carpentry. Typical uses
include exterior siding, shingles, decking, exposed beams, glue-laminated
beams, paneling, cabinetry, and millwork. In historic preservation it can be
used as a substitute for Thuja plicata (western red cedar) and Taxodium
distichum (bald cypress), due to current difficulties in obtaining quality
timber of those species due to environmental concern and past over-
exploitation, although this applies equally to Nootka cypress.

Other uses for Nootka cypress include saunas, and battery containers due to
its resistance to acids. Traditionally, paddles, masks, dishes, and bows were
made from the wood.

### Landscaping[edit]

Cultivated Specimens at Morton Arboretum

The drooping branchlets give the tree a graceful weeping appearance. It makes
an attractive specimen tree in parks and open spaces. It can also be used as a
tall hedge.

It will grow in USDA plant hardiness zones 5-9, but can be difficult to grow.
Best growth is in light or heavy soil, preferably well drained, and in
climates with cool summers. It prefers semi-shade to full sun.

Nootka cypress can also be used in bonsai.

The cultivar C. nootkatensis 'Pendula' has gained the Royal Horticultural
Society's Award of Garden Merit.[20]

### Firewood[edit]

Nootka cypress has extreme heartwood qualities that make this one of the most
desired sources of heat on the west coast. A dead tree can last up to 100
years for firewood. This wood burns very hot and lasts a long time as embers.

## Indigenous societies[edit]

See also: Indigenous uses of yellow cedar

The Nootka cypress is used extensively by the indigenous peoples of the
Pacific Northwest Coast, along with another cypress, Thuja plicata (western
red cedar). While western red cedar was preferred for larger projects (houses,
canoes), Nootka cypress was used for smaller carvings such as vessels and
utensils.

A legend amongst the Nootka peoples of the Hesquiaht First Nation tells of the
origins of the Nootka cypress. In the legend, a raven encounters three young
women drying salmon on the beach. He asks the women if they are afraid of
being alone, if they are afraid of bears, wolves, and other animals. Each
women responded "no". But when asked about owls, the women were indeed afraid
of owls. Hearing this, the trickster raven hid in the forests, and made the
calls of an owl. The terrified women ran up the mountains, but turned into
Nootka cypress trees when they were out of breath. According to the Nootka,
this is why Nootka cypress grows on the sides of mountains, and also why the
bark is silky like a woman's hair, the young trunk is smooth like a woman's
body.[21]

In Tlingit culture the story of Natsilane describes how a Nootka cypress was
used to carve the world's first killer whale.

## References[edit]

  1. ^ The Plant List, Xanthocyparis nootkatensis
  2. ^ Gadek, P. A., Alpers, D. L., Heslewood, M. M., & Quinn, C. J. 2000. Relationships within Cupressaceae sensu lato: a combined morphological and molecular approach. American Journal of Botany 87: 1044-1057. Abstract
  3. ^ Little, D. P., Schwarzbach, A. E., Adams, R. P. & Hsieh, Chang-Fu. 2004. The circumscription and phylogenetic relationships of Callitropsis and the newly described genus Xanthocyparis (Cupressaceae). American Journal of Botany 91 (11): 1872-1881. Abstract
  4. ^ a b Farjon, A., Hiep, N. T., Harder, D. K., Loc, P. K., & Averyanov, L. 2002. A new genus and species in the Cupressaceae (Coniferales) from northern Vietnam, Xanthocyparis vietnamensis. Novon 12: 179-189.
  5. ^ Mill, R. R. and Farjon, A. (2006). Proposal to conserve the name Xanthocyparis against Callitropsis Oerst. (Cupressaceeae). Taxon 55(1): 229-231.
  6. ^ Mao, K., Hao, G., Liu, J., Adams, R. P. & Milne, R. I. 2010: Diversification and biogeography of Juniperus (Cupressaceae): variable diversification rates and multiple intercontinental dispersals. - In New Phytologist. 188(1):254-272.
  7. ^ Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Cupressus". The Gymnosperm Database.
  8. ^ Earle, Christopher J., ed. (2018). "Cupressus nootkatensis". The Gymnosperm Database.
  9. ^ Sullivan, Steven. K. (2015). "Cupressus nootkatensis". Wildflower Search. Retrieved 2015-03-31.
  10. ^ "Cupressus nootkatensis". Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS Database. USDA. Retrieved 2015-03-31.
  11. ^ Klinkenberg, Brian (Editor) (2014). "Xanthocyparis nootkatensis". E-Flora BC: Electronic Atlas of the Plants of British Columbia [eflora.bc.ca]. Lab for Advanced Spatial Analysis, Department of Geography, University of British Columbia, Vancouver. Retrieved 2015-03-31. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link) 
  12. ^ Giblin, David (Editor) (2015). "Callitropsis nootkatensis". WTU Herbarium Image Collection. Burke Museum, University of Washington. Retrieved 2015-03-31. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link) 
  13. ^ "Callitropsis nootkatensis". Jepson eFlora: Taxon page. Jepson Herbarium; University of California, Berkeley. 2015. Retrieved 2015-03-31.
  14. ^ "Yellow-cedar are dying in Alaska; scientists now know why". Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. February 1, 2012.
  15. ^ Rosen, Yereth (November 26, 2016). "New mapping shows extent of yellow-cedar die-off in Alaska; analysis forecasts big losses in the future". Anchorage Daily News.
  16. ^ "Yellow cedar (Calliptropsis nootkatensis)". ECOS Environmental Conservation Online System. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Retrieved 9 February 2017.
  17. ^ Soley, Theresa (30 September 2016). "Endangered Alaska tree? Rapidly dying yellow cedar may be listed". Alaska Dispatch News. Retrieved 9 February 2017.
  18. ^ La Ganga, Maria L. (10 April 2015). "Alaska yellow cedar closer to Endangered Species Act protection". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 9 February 2017.
  19. ^ Peattie, Donald Culross. Trees You Want to Know. Whitman Publishing Company, Racine, Wisconsin, 1934 page 30
  20. ^ "RHS Plant Selector - Cupressus nootkatensis 'Pendula'". Retrieved 3 July 2013.
  21. ^ Stewart, Hilary. (1984). Cedar: tree of life to the Northwest Coast Indians. Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre. ISBN 0-88894-437-3.

  * Zsolt Debreczy, Istvan Racz (2012). Kathy Musial, ed. Conifers Around the World (1st ed.). DendroPress. p. 1089\. ISBN 9632190610.

## External links[edit]

Wikimedia Commons has media related to:

Cupressus nootkatensis (category)  
  
  * Data related to Cupressus nootkatensis at Wikispecies
  * Gymnosperm Database: Cupressus nootkatensis
  * Pinetum.org: Cupressus nootkatensis - Photo of cones

  * v
  * t
  * e

Extant Cupressaceae species  
  
Subfamily Athrotaxidoideae

Athrotaxis

  * A. cupressoides
  * A. selaginoides
  * A. laxifolia

  
  
Subfamily Callitroideae

Actinostrobus

  * A. acuminatus
  * A. arenarius
  * A. pyramidalis

  
  
Austrocedrus

  * A. chilensis

  
  
Callitris

  * C. baileyi
  * C. canescens
  * C. columellaris
  * C. drummondii
  * C. endlicheri
  * C. macleayana
  * C. monticola
  * C. muelleri
  * C. neocaledonica
  * C. oblonga
  * C. preissii
  * C. rhomboidea
  * C. roei
  * C. sulcata
  * C. verrucosa

  
  
Diselma

  * D. archeri

  
  
Fitzroya

  * F. cupressoides

  
  
Libocedrus

  * L. austrocaledonicus
  * L. bidwillii
  * L. chevalieri
  * L. plumosa
  * L. yateensis

  
  
Neocallitropsis

  * N. pancheri

  
  
Papuacedrus

  * P. papuana

  
  
Pilgerodendron

  * P. uviferum

  
  
Widdringtonia

  * W. cafra
  * W. cedarbergensis
  * W. commersonii
  * W. cupressoides
  * W. dracomontana
  * W. equisetiformis
  * W. juniperoides
  * W. mahoni
  * W. natalensis
  * W. nodiflora
  * W. schwarzii
  * W. stipitata
  * W. whytei

  
  
Subfamily Cunninghamioideae

Cunninghamia

  * C. konishii
  * C. lanceolata

  
  
Subfamily Cupressoideae

Calocedrus

  * C. decurrens
  * C. formosana
  * C. macrolepis
  * C. rupestris   

  
  
Chamaecyparis

  * C. formosensis
  * C. lawsoniana
  * C. obtusa
  * C. pisifera
  * C. taiwanensis
  * C. thyoides

  
  
Cupressus

Old World Species:

  * C. atlantica
  * C. austrotibetica
  * C. cashmeriana
  * C. chengiana
  * C. duclouxiana
  * C. dupreziana
  * C. funebris
  * C. gigantea
  * C. sempervirens
  * C. tonkinensis
  * C. torulosa
  * C. vietnamensis

  
New World Species:

  * C. abramsiana
  * C. arizonica
  * C. bakeri
  * C. benthamii
  * C. forbesii
  * C. glabra
  * C. goveniana
  * C. guadalupensis
  * C. lusitanica
  * C. macnabiana
  * C. macrocarpa
  * C. montana
  * C. nevadensis
  * C. nootkatensis
  * C. pigmaea
  * C. revealiana
  * C. sargentii
  * C. stephensonii

  
  
Fokienia

* F. hodginsii  
  
Juniperus

Section Juniperus

  * J. brevifolia
  * J. cedrus
  * J. communis
  * J. conferta
  * J. drupacea
  * J. formosana
  * J. lutchuensis
  * J. macrocarpa
  * J. oxycedrus
  * J. rigida

  
  
Section Sabina

Old World Species:

  * J. chinensis
  * J. convallium
  * J. excelsa
  * J. foetidissima
  * J. indica
  * J. komarovii
  * J. phoenicea
  * J. pingii
  * J. procera
  * J. procumbens
  * J. pseudosabina
  * J. recurva
  * J. sabina
  * J. saltuaria
  * J. semiglobosa
  * J. squamata
  * J. thurifera
  * J. tibetica
  * J. wallichiana  

New World Species:

  * J. angosturana
  * J. ashei
  * J. arizonica
  * J. barbadensis
  * J. bermudiana
  * J. blancoi
  * J. californica
  * J. coahuilensis
  * J. comitana
  * J. deppeana
  * J. durangensis
  * J. flaccida
  * J. gamboana
  * J. horizontalis
  * J. jaliscana
  * J. monosperma
  * J. monticola
  * J. occidentalis
  * J. osteosperma
  * J. pinchotii
  * J. saltillensis
  * J. scopulorum
  * J. standleyi
  * J. virginiana
  * J. zanonii

  
  
Microbiota

* M. decussata  
  
Platycladus

  * P. orientalis

  
  
Tetraclinis

  * T. articulata

  
  
Thuja

  * T. koraiensis
  * T. occidentalis
  * T. plicata
  * T. standishii
  * T. sutchuenensis

  
  
Thujopsis

  * T. dolabrata

  
  
Xanthocyparis

  * X. nootkatensis
  * X. vietnamensis

  
  
Subfamily Sequoioideae

Metasequoia

  * M. glyptostroboides   

  
  
Sequoia

  * S. sempervirens   

  
  
Sequoiadendron

  * S. giganteum   

  
  
Subfamily Taiwanioideae

Taiwania

  * T. cryptomerioides

  
  
Subfamily Taxodioideae

Cryptomeria

  * C. japonica

  
  
Glyptostrobus

  * G. pensilis   

  
  
Taxodium

  * T. ascendens
  * T. distichum
  * T. mucronatum   

  
  
Taxon identifiers  
  
Cupressus nootkatensis

  * Wikidata: Q17275264
  * Wikispecies: Cupressus nootkatensis
  * CNPS: 3316
  * Conifers.org: Cupressus_nootkatensis
  * GBIF: 2683903
  * GRIN: 12663
  * iNaturalist: 126792
  * IPNI: 261952-1
  * IRMNG: 11345322
  * ITIS: 183452
  * NZOR: d342d502-0d36-481b-9d11-92101e4f5d60
  * Plant List: kew-2748751
  * PLANTS: CUNO
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:261952-1
  * Tropicos: 9400007
  * uBio: 4963809
  * VASCAN: 14907
  * WCSP: 383204

  
  
Callitropsis nootkatensis

  * Wikidata: Q23707222
  * Calflora: 10729
  * CNPS: 455
  * GBIF: 5284235
  * GRIN: 447594
  * ITIS: 822596
  * NCBI: 85954
  * PLANTS: CANO9
  * Tropicos: 50301454
  * VASCAN: 4700

  
  
Xanthocyparis nootkatensis

  * Wikidata: Q163811
  * EoL: 323365
  * EPPO: CHCNO
  * GBIF: 2683894
  * GRIN: 426902
  * IPNI: 20006843-1
  * IUCN: 44029
  * NBN: NHMSYS0020110594
  * NZOR: eef7e1e2-2b71-41d3-bfbb-d26524045d32
  * Plant List: kew-2468334
  * Tropicos: 50218430
  * VASCAN: 14909

  
  
Chamaecyparis nootkatensis

  * Wikidata: Q15043561
  * CNPS: 2644
  * FNA: 233500342
  * GBIF: 2683900
  * GRIN: 10077
  * iNaturalist: 160384
  * IRMNG: 11439208
  * ITIS: 183451
  * NZOR: 34f4b373-ef52-446a-b10c-fdc3a04d93b1
  * VASCAN: 14908

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cupressus_nootkatensis&oldid=852747465"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Cupressus
  * Trees of Alaska
  * Trees of the West Coast of the United States
  * Trees of Subarctic America
  * Trees of Western Canada
  * Trees of British Columbia
  * Trees of the Northwestern United States
  * Plants described in 1824
  * Native American culture
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Least concern flora of the United States
  * Least concern plants

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
  * Articles with 'species' microformats
  * Taxonbars using multiple manual Wikidata items

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Catala
  * Cebuano
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * Francais
  * Galego
  * Hornjoserbsce
  * Hrvatski
  * Islenska
  * Italiano
  * Lietuviu
  * Magyar
  * Nederlands
  * Norsk
  * Piemonteis
  * Polski
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 31 July 2018, at 02:41 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

