# Dacrydium cupressinum

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

"Rimu" redirects here. For other uses, see Rimu (disambiguation).

Rimu  
A mature rimu  
  
Conservation status  
  
  
Least Concern (IUCN 3.1)[1]  
  
Scientific classification  
Kingdom: Plantae  
Division: Pinophyta  
Class: Pinopsida  
Order: Pinales  
Family: Podocarpaceae  
Genus: Dacrydium  
Species:  D. cupressinum  
Binomial name  
Dacrydium cupressinum  
Sol. ex Lamb.  
Natural range of D. cupressinum  
  
Dacrydium cupressinum, commonly known as rimu, is a large evergreen coniferous
tree endemic to the forests of New Zealand. It is a member of the southern
conifer group, the podocarps. The former name "red pine" has fallen out of
common use.

## Contents

  * 1 Distribution
  * 2 Description
  * 3 Uses
  * 4 In cultivation
  * 5 References
  * 6 External links

## Distribution[edit]

Rimu grows throughout New Zealand, in the North Island, South Island and
Stewart Island/Rakiura. Although the largest concentration of trees is now
found on the West Coast of the South Island, the biggest trees tend to be in
mixed podocarp forest near Taupo (e.g., Pureora, Waihaha, and Whirinaki
Forests). A typical North Island habitat is in the Hamilton Ecological
District, where Fuscospora truncata and rimu form the overstory. Associate
ferns on the forest floor are Blechnum discolor, Blechnum filiforme, Asplenium
flaccidum and Hymenophyllum demissum.[2]

Rimu foliage.

## Description[edit]

Rimu is a slow-growing tree, eventually attaining a height of up to 50 m,
although most surviving large trees are 20 to 35 m tall. It typically appears
as an emergent from mixed broadleaf temperate rainforest, although there are
almost pure stands (especially on the west coast of the South Island). There
are historical accounts of exceptionally tall trees, 61 m, from dense forest
near National Park in the central North Island, now destroyed.[3] Its lifespan
is approximately 800 to 900 years. The straight trunk of the rimu is generally
1.5 m in diameter, but may be larger in old or very tall specimens.[3]

The leaves are spirally arranged, awl-shaped, up to 7 mm long on juvenile
plants, and 1 mm wide; and 2 to 3 mm long on mature trees.[3] It is dioecious,
with male and female cones on separate trees; the seeds take 15 months to
mature after pollination. The mature cones comprise a swollen red fleshy scale
six to ten mm long bearing one (rarely two) apical seeds 4 mm long. The seeds
are dispersed by birds which eat the fleshy scale and pass the seed on in
their droppings; they are an important food resource for some species,
particularly the kakapo, whose breeding cycle has been linked to cone
production cycle of the tree.

Rimu seed cones.

## Uses[edit]

Historically, rimu and other native trees such as kauri, matai and totara were
the main sources of wood for New Zealand, including furniture and house
construction. However, many of New Zealand's original stands of rimu have been
destroyed, and recent government policies forbid the felling of rimu in public
forests, though allowing limited logging on private land. Pinus radiata has
now replaced rimu in most industries, although rimu remains popular for the
production of high quality wooden furniture. There is also limited recovery of
stump and root wood, from trees felled many years before, for use in making
bowls and other wood turned objects.

The inner bark can also be used to treat burns and cuts.[4]

## In cultivation[edit]

Although slow to establish, with a long juvenile period and fairly high
moisture requirements, rimu is widely grown as an ornamental tree in New
Zealand. It is attractive at all growth stages, usually quite narrow when
young, then developing into a broader tree with weeping branches before
finally progressing to its more upright adult form. While rimu does exhibit
some variation in the wild, garden cultivars are largely unknown, except for
one recent introduction, 'Charisma', which is a compact, golden-foliaged form.

Trunk of a rimu with rata (Metrosideros) vines

## References[edit]

  1. ^ Thomas, P. (2013). "Dacrydium cupressinum". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2013: e.T42448A2981038. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T42448A2981038.en. Retrieved 12 December 2017.
  2. ^ C. Michael Hogan. 2009. Crown Fern: Blechnum discolor, Globaltwitcher.com, ed. N. Stromberg Archived February 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
  3. ^ a b c Salmon, J.T. (1993). The Native Trees of New Zealand. Auckland, New Zealand: Reed Books. pp. 74-79.
  4. ^ "Maori uses: Medicinal plants, Conifers". University of Auckland. Archived from the original on 15 October 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-12.

## External links[edit]

  * "Dacrydium cupressinum". New Zealand Plant Conservation Network. Retrieved 2010-10-03.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dacrydium cupressinum.  
  
Taxon identifiers

  * Wikidata: Q382469
  * Wikispecies: Dacrydium cupressinum
  * Conifers.org: Dacrydium_cupressinum
  * EoL: 1033673
  * EPPO: DADCU
  * Fossilworks: 279370
  * GBIF: 5286163
  * GRIN: 70217
  * iNaturalist: 52382
  * IPNI: 262005-1
  * IRMNG: 10601784
  * ITIS: 505859
  * IUCN: 42448
  * NCBI: 56890
  * NZOR: 134a9fd7-dc76-4702-ba7f-75f2398a118f
  * PfaF: Dacrydium cupressinum
  * Plant List: kew-2755059
  * PLANTS: DACU2
  * POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:60471363-2
  * Tropicos: 25600118
  * WCSP: 383505

  
  
Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dacrydium_cupressinum&oldid=825972778"

Categories:

  * IUCN Red List least concern species
  * Dacrydium
  * Trees of New Zealand
  * Trees of mild maritime climate
  * Least concern plants

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Articles with 'species' microformats

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

###  Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

###  Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikispecies

### Languages

  * Cebuano
  * Deutsch
  * Espanol
  * ?????
  * Francais
  * Italiano
  * Lietuviu
  * ??????????
  * Maori
  * Nederlands
  * Portugues
  * Romana
  * ???????
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * ??????????
  * Tieng Viet
  * Winaray
  * ??

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 16 February 2018, at 13:32 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia(R) is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy
  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  *   * 

